
Graphic Workshop
ÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛ


ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß

If you like this program, please:

Send us $40.00, the normal user fee for Graphic Workshop.

Registered users of Graphic Workshop are entitled to phone support, 
notification of upgrades and good karma. When you register it, 
we'll send you a copy of the latest version. Please tell us the 
platform and version number of your copy of Graphic Workshop 
when you register. Our address can be found in the Registration 
section of this document, and in the end screen of Graphic Workshop.


ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß

NOTE: You can register Graphic Workshop with an American 
Express, Mastercard or Visa card by calling 1-800-263-1138 (toll 
free) from the United States and Canada or 1-905-936-9500 from 
other places. 

NOTE: CompuServe users can register Graphic Workshop by typing 
GO SWREG at any CompuServe prompt. You can contact us directly 
over CompuServe at 70451,2734.

Our Internet address is alchemy@accesspt.north.net -- we do not 
recommend that you leave credit card information on the 
Internet.

Overseas distributors:

AUSTRIA:
PEARL AGENCY Osterreich, Grunburgerstr. 7a, A-4540 Bad Hall

BRITAIN:
The Public Domain & Shareware Library Ltd., Winscombe House, 
Beacon Road, Crowborough, Sussex, TN6 1UL, England, telephone 
0892 663298, FAX 0892 667473, BBS 0892 661149.

CZECH REPUB: 
JIMAZ s.r.o., Hermanova 37, 170 00 Praha 7, Czech Republic 
Telephone: +42-2-379-498, FAX: +42-2-378-103.

DENMARK:
Prof Shareware, Benloese Skel 4 G, DK 4100, Ringsted, Denmark.

FRANCE:
DP Tool Club, 102 rue des fusilles, 59650 Villeneuve 
d'Ascq, France, telephone (33) 20 56 55 33, fax (33) 20 56 55 25. 

GERMANY:
1. Der PD-Profi, Schulstraae 13, D-86666, Burgheim-Wengen 
Telephone 8432-1296, FAX 8432-8674
2. PEARL AGENCY Tel 07631 120 91-99, Fax 07631 120 08-9

JAPAN:
P&A Shareware, 302 Bellwins, 1367-23, Nakagami, Akishima, Tokyo, 
JAPAN 196, telephone (81) 425-46-9141, FAX (81) 425-46-9142

NOTE: We have a bulletin board system. See the section on 
contacting Alchemy Mindworks for more information.


NOTE: Registered users of Graphic Workshop will receive the 
Graphic Workshop accessory disk and the Graphic Workshop screen 
capture utility at no extra cost.

NOTE: With release seven of Graphic Workshop we've changed the 
registration numbers required to establish a registered copy. We 
did this because it appears that the program which generated the 
old numbers has fallen into unfriendly hands. If you have 
previously registered Graphic Workshop for DOS version 6.1 any 
time on or after the summer's solstice... June 21, 1993... please 
write us and we'll provide you with a new number at no cost. We 
are unable to provide registration numbers by phone, electronic 
mail or FAX.


CONTENTS
ÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛÛ

Introduction

New Features in Release Seven

Hardware and Software

Frequently Asked Questions

File Formats
   Macpaint
   GEM/IMG
   JPEG
   PC Paintbrush PCX
   CompuServe GIF
   TIFF (including group III, group IV and LZW)
   WordPerfect Graphics WPG
   Deluxe Paint/Amiga IFF/LBM
   PC Paint Pictor PIC
   Truevision Targa
   Windows 3 BMP
   Microsoft Paint MSP
   Encapsulated PostScript EPS
   Self-displaying EXE pictures 
   Text files
   Halo CUT 
   Windows 3 RLE
   PFS:First Publisher Art files
   Sun Raster
   HRZ slow scan television
   UUE uuencoded graphics from the Internet
                
24-bit files

Using the Main Menu
   Help
   Control keys
   Viewing and colour adjustment
   Printing
   Conversion
   Dithering
   Getting file information
   Cropping
   Reversing
   Transforming
   Special effects
   Cataloging

Screen Capture

Configuration
   Runtime editing
   Screen driver selection
   Printer driver selection

DesqView, QEMM and Other Environments

Script Language

Ventura Tricks

Corel Draw Tricks

A Word About Memory

A Word About Mice

If you Encounter a Problem

Contacting Alchemy Mindworks Inc.

Shareware Registration

Technical Support        -- IN CASE OF EMERGENCY READ THIS --

Bundling Graphic Workshop

Books

Graphic Workshop Accessory Disk

Shareware Distributors

Revision History

Legal Dogma


INTRODUCTION
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Graphic Workshop is a program for working with bitmapped graphic files. 
It will handle most of the popular formats, as listed in the 
contents section of this document.

Graphic Workshop is a simple, menu driven environment which will 
let you perform the following operations on the aforementioned 
files.

- View them.
- Convert between any two formats (with a few restrictions).
- Print them to any LaserJet Plus compatible or PostScript laser     
  and most dot matrix printers. Graphic Workshop can print colour   
  pictures to colour PostScript and inkjet printers.
- Dither and threshold the colour ones to black and white.
- Reverse them.
- Rotate and flip them.
- Scale them.
- Reduce the number of colours in them and do colour dithering.
- Sharpen, soften and otherwise wreak special effects on them.
- Crop them down to smaller files
- Create catalogs of a collection of images.
- Adjust the brightness, contrast and colour balance of the 
  colour ones.
- Capture your screen to a PCX file in most of the popular VGA 
  and super VGA text and graphic modes.

Using Graphic Workshop, you can have your image files in the 
formats that your software recognizes, all without keeping track 
of numerous funky utilities. In addition, using the halftoning 
and dithering facilities of Graphic Workshop, you can convert 
full colour digitized photographs for use as superb black and 
white clip art, suitable for inclusion in your documents.

Graphic Workshop will handle image files of any size. It will use 
extended or expanded memory if you have some, and disk space if 
you don't. It has a fast and easily understood user interface. 
Hopefully, it lacks even the merest vestiges of bugs... a likely 
story, but we hope so.

Graphic Workshop will work with a Microsoft-compatible mouse if you 
have a suitable mouse driver loaded in your system prior to 
running GWS.EXE.

Graphic Workshop will drive all of the popular display cards. A 
complete discussion of display cards can be found later in this 
document.

As it comes out of the box... or out of the ZIP... 
Graphic Workshop is configured like as follows. If you want to 
change some of these parameters, see the installation section of 
this document.

- It attempts to autodetect the display card type.
- It uses virtual memory.
- It uses colour text.
- It prints titles on its hard copy.
- It uses the commonly required file format defaults.
- It does not prompt for a destination directory.
- It creates dithered, three-dimensional catalog images.


NEW FEATURES OF RELEASE SEVEN
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Release seven of Graphic Workshop represents a major rewrite 
of the software. Its new features include:

- Support for JPEG compression and the Independent JPEG Group's 
  JFIF file format.
- Additional colour reduction and dithering options.
- Better memory management.
- PFS:First Publisher ART file support.
- Sun raster file support.
- Expanded TIFF options, including group III, group IV and LZW.
- HRZ slow scan TV support.
- High colour PIC support.
- Easier setup installation.
- In-session parameter overrides.
- Improved and expanded VESA drivers, now including true colour.
- Catalog function.
- Optional prompt for destination directories.
- Monitor gamma compensation.
- Plus numerous other improvements...

Note that with release seven of Graphic Workshop scanner support 
has been removed from the package.


HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Graphic Workshop will run on any PC compatible system with at 
least 640 kilobytes of memory. A few megabytes of extended or 
expanded memory will make Graphic Workshop a lot faster and more 
useful if you'll be working with large files. Some functions may 
not work, or may work very slowly, in restricted memory.

In the absence of extra memory, a lot of free hard drive space 
will help.

Graphic Workshop can drive most graphic cards. A more complete 
discussion of graphic cards can be found later in this document. 
If you have a CGA, EGA, stock VGA or Hercules card in your 
system, Graphic Workshop will probably be able to detect it and 
set itself up accordingly. If you have a super-VGA card in your 
system, Graphic Workshop must be configured to use it. If you do 
not do this, it will default to treating it as a stock VGA card.

Configuration is discussed in detail later in this document.

Graphic Workshop will run under DOS 2.0 or better. We recommend 
that you use at least DOS 3.3. You will need a suitable expanded 
or extended memory driver in your system for Graphic Workshop to 
recognize your extra memory.

You should have received the following files in the 
Graphic Workshop package:

- GWS.EXE - The Graphic Workshop program itself.
- GWS.RES - The Graphic Workshop resource file.
- GWS.DOC - Yes, you're reading it now.
- GWSHELP.RES - The on line help resource.
- GWSDRV.RES - All the super-VGA screen drivers.
- GWSPDR.RES - All the dot matrix printer drivers.
- GWSINSTL.EXE - The Graphic Workshop configuration utility.
- EXAMPLE1.BMP - A monochrome picture file.
- EXAMPLE2.GIF - A sixteen-colour picture file.
- EXAMPLE3.GIF - A 256-colour picture file.
- VIEW-ME.GIF - View this file.
- VGACARD.COM - A tool to help select a screen driver.
- VGACARD.DOC - Read this before you use VGACARD.COM.
- ORDER.FRM - Order form to register Graphic Workshop

There is no EXAMPLE4, a 24-bit picture file, as the smallest one 
we could find ran to over 400 kilobytes. There are several 24-bit 
files on our bulletin board, should you want one to look at.

Registered users will also receive:

- ACCESS.ZIP - The Graphic Workshop accessory disk contents.
- GWSCAP.COM - The GWSCAP screen capture utility.
- GWSCAP.DOC - The documentation for the screen capture.

It's inadvisable to run Graphic Workshop for DOS while shelled 
out of other applications, such as Microsoft Windows, DOSSHELL, 
Norton Commander, Quarterdeck and so on.


FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
If you encounter a problem with Graphic Workshop, please read this 
document, and the following section particularly, before you get 
in touch with us.


CAN I READ EPS FILES WITH GRAPHIC WORKSHOP?
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Graphic Workshop will create EPS files from bitmapped graphics 
and it will display the EPS preview images of EPS files from 
other sources which have previews. It will not read the 
PostScript data from EPS files, and if there is no preview header 
available it will display an error message.


IF I SAVE AN IMAGE FILE OF SCANNED TEXT TO A TXT FILE FROM 
GRAPHIC WORKSHOP, WILL THE TEXT FILE I CREATE BE THE WORDS FROM 
THE SCANNED IMAGE?
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
No. This requires an optical character recognition package.


WILL GRAPHIC WORKSHOP SUPPORT CDR, WMF OR CGM FILES IN THE 
FUTURE?
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
It's not likely. In creating Graphic Workshop, we chose to have 
it do one thing well... working with bitmapped graphics... rather 
than several things badly. Formats such as CDR, WMF, CGM and EPS 
are vector graphics, which require completely different 
applications. Graphic Workshop for Windows has some facilities 
for reading vector graphics.


WHY WILL SOME WPG FILES READ UNDER GRAPHIC WORKSHOP AND SOME 
WON'T?
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
The WPG format can support both bitmapped and vector graphics. 
Graphic Workshop will deal with the bitmapped ones only. The Get 
Info function will tell you which files contain bitmaps and which 
one only have vector graphics in them.


WHY DOES ATTEMPTING TO READ SOME EXE FILES FAIL?
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
The extension EXE is normally used to indicate actual application 
files, that is, programs. Graphic Workshop uses it to indicate 
pictures which it has converted into programs as well... which it 
must do, such that DOS will recognize them as programs when you 
choose to run them. Unfortunately, one file name looks pretty 
much like another when Graphic Workshop is assembling its file 
list, and it can't tell which EXE files are programs and which 
are pictures.


WHY WON'T GRAPHIC WORKSHOP READ SOME TIFF FILES?
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
The TIFF standard is a huge, fairly confusing thing which allows 
applications which create TIFF files to do so in an almost 
limitless variety of ways. It's probably technically impossible 
to write software that will read all of them... at the very 
least, such an application would be huge. Graphic Workshop 
attempts to read a sensible range of TIFF files, and we improve 
on its TIFF handling frequently. However, there will probably 
always be unusual TIFF files it won't be able to handle. In 
creating TIFF files to be read by Graphic Workshop, we recommend 
that you begin by trying the simplest defaults, such as no 
compression.


WHAT HAPPENED TO THE SCANNER SUPPORT IN GRAPHIC WORKSHOP?
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
In creating release seven of Graphic Workshop we were confronted 
with a space problem. The available 640 kilobytes of memory in a 
conventional PC was getting full. Something had to go, and 
scanner support seemed to be the function which was the least 
used.


WHY DO A I SEE A MENU WITH VIEWING OPTIONS WHEN I ATTEMPT TO VIEW 
SOME FILES?
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Your current display adapter or display adapter driver can display 
fewer colours than the image contains. Graphic Workshop is 
offering to dither or otherwise modify the image to make it 
viewable.


WHY DO I SEE A COARSE IMAGE WITH ONLY PART OF MY IMAGE IN IT IF I 
ATTEMPT TO DISPLAY A 256-COLOUR IMAGE?
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
By default, Graphic Workshop configures itself for standard VGA 
mode. The only 256-colour mode available in this case is the 
coarse 320 by 200 pixel mode. Use VGACARD and GWSINSTL to select 
a screen driver for your display card.


HOW CAN I MAKE THE PICTURES PRINTED BY GRAPHIC WORKSHOP TO MY 
LASER PRINTER LARGER?
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Choose a lower resolution print option or the appropriate 
Autosize selection.


FILE FORMATS
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Graphic Workshop works exclusively with bitmapped image files. 
This is as opposed to vector or line art files. Vector files 
include DXF, GEM, CDR, Harvard Graphics, Lotus PIC and CGM files, 
among others. Graphic Workshop does not support vector files, nor 
is it likely to in the immediate future.

In most cases, the specifications for image files are pretty 
standardized, and Graphic Workshop will reliably import image 
files in its supported formats without difficulty. There are a 
few exceptions to this, as will be discussed in detail throughout 
this section.

Each of the formats listed here also includes the maximum number 
of bits of colour the format will support. You can work out the 
number of colours this represents as 2 to the power of the number 
of bits. Hence, an eight-bit file has 2^^8 possible colours, or 
256. Twenty-four bit files have essentially an infinite number of 
possible colours.


MACPAINT FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 1
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
These can come in two flavours. The most common one is straight 
ported MacPaint files, that is, files having the "MacBinary" 
header. The other is "headerless" files, these being the ones 
used with PFS:First Publisher. Graphic Workshop reads both types, 
but if you convert a file from a different format to MacPaint 
format the file will be written in accordance with the setting of 
the MacBinary header field in GWSINSTL. You can override this 
with the appropriate command line switches.

Files converted to the MacPaint format from other formats will be 
cropped or padded out as necessary to fit in the MacPaint 
format's 576 by 720 format. Only monochrome files can be 
converted to MacPaint files, since MacPaint in a monochrome-only 
format.


GEM/IMG FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 24
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
There are actually quite a few variations on IMG files... they 
handle monochrome and grey level images. The primary application 
for IMG files is as the bitmapped image file format of Ventura 
Publisher. Graphic Workshop supports files with up to 256 levels 
of grey and 24-bit colour IMG files. Note that 24-bit IMG files 
are only read and written by Ventura Publisher version 4.0 or 
better.


PCX FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 24
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
These are the files used to hold images for Z-Soft's PC 
Paintbrush package. These can range from monochrome to 24-bit 
images. All the various formats are supported by 
Graphic Workshop.

Note that some FAX boards which export PCX files do so in a 
peculiar way... they include one fewer lines of image data than 
the files purport to contain. Graphic Workshop regards these as being
corrupted files. If you encounter these files, the PCXPATCH 
utility available on the Graphic Workshop accessory disk, 
discussed elsewhere in this document, will fix the problem.


GIF FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 8
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
These can range from monochrome to 256-colour images in any size 
you can find 'em. Graphic Workshop supports both the 87a and 89a 
versions of the GIF standard. It will read the first image of GIF 
files having multiple images.

The Details function of the Get Info box will display the entire 
structure of a GIF file. Many newer GIF files contain text 
information along with their images.

By default Graphic Workshop writes GIF 89a files. If you require 
GIF 87a files, use the /G87 command line switch or set 
up Graphic Workshop appropriately with GWSINSTL.


TIFF FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 24
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
The TIFF options in Graphic Workshop can get a bit involved. The 
TIFF format offers lots of options to make it applicable to a 
wide variety of applications... which entails a certain amount of 
confusion, as well. Registered users of Graphic Workshop are 
welcome to contact us for help in unraveling the TIFF options if 
needs be.

Graphic Workshop supports monochrome, colour and grey scale TIFF 
files. Grey scale TIFF files can be created by converting any 
colour format into TIFF with Graphic Workshop set up to produce 
grey scale TIFF files, either through GWSINSTL or by using the 
/TCG switch. These import into desktop publishing packages such 
as Ventura for sharp looking PostScript halftones.

Note that as of this writing Ventura will read grey scale TIFF 
files correctly. Some versions seem to invert colour TIFF files. 

Colour TIFF files are useful in Corel Draw, among other places. 
Corel Draw 2.0 will import colour TIFF files for inclusion in 
CDR graphics. This is preferable to importing colour PCX files, 
as the size of a TIFF file in Corel Draw is preserved.

Some applications have trouble reading grey scale TIFF files 
which have been compressed... Gray F/X chokes on them as of this 
writing, for example. Others read 'em fine. For this reason, 
Graphic Workshop defaults to creating compressed grey scale TIFF 
files but you can tell it not to compress them if you're not sure 
that whatever you'll be importing them into will read them. There 
are command line switches to set up these options.

Note that due to the wide variations among the programs which 
produce TIFF files, Graphic Workshop would be lying rather badly 
if it claimed to be able to read all TIFF files. 

When you're creating TIFF files which will be used as desktop 
publishing art or in other situations wherein they'll be printed 
to a PostScript printer, you should create them with greyscale 
expansion enabled. If they will be displayed on a monitor or 
edited in a paint program, you may want to create them with 
greyscale expansion disabled. 

Whether you create colour or grey scale TIFF files will be 
largely dependant on the application you want your TIFF files to 
be read by. Here are a few guidelines:
        
- If you want to import TIFF files into Ventura or PageMaker so 
  they'll output as halftones to a PostScript printer, use grey 
  scale TIFF files with grey scale expansion enabled.

- If you want to import colour TIFF files into Corel Draw to 
  print to a colour output device, use colour TIFF files... the 
  grey scale expansion doesn't matter.

- If you want to import colour TIFF files into Corel Draw to 
  print to a monochrome output device, use grey scale TIFF files 
  with the grey scale expansion enabled.

- If you want to import grey scale TIFF files into a paint or 
  image editing package, such as ImageIn or Desktop Paint 256, 
  use grey scale TIFF files with the grey scale expansion 
  disabled.

Note also that Graphic Workshop packs TIFF files with an eye to 
maximum unpacking speed, rather than for optimum compression. As 
such, pictures with between 32 and 256 colours will be promoted 
to 256 colours. Pictures with between four and sixteen colours 
will be promoted to sixteen colours.


WPG FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 8 (OR MAYBE 4)
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
These are the native import graphic files for WordPerfect. These 
files can contain both bitmaps and line art, or vector graphics. 
Graphic Workshop can only deal with the bitmapped parts of them. 
If you view, print or convert a WPG file containing both 
bitmapped and vector elements, the vector elements will be 
discarded.

WPG files which refuse to read with Graphic Workshop are usually 
those which contain only vector elements and no bitmaps. If you 
use the F4 function on a WPG file which does not read, the 
comments field of the file information box will say "Vector file" 
if this is the case, or display an error message.

Graphic Workshop will deal with WPG files having one, four or 
eight bits of colour information, that is, monochrome files, 
sixteen-colour files and 256-colour files. 

The WPG specification allows for 256-colour files. As of this 
writing, WordPerfect itself would not read them. If you wish to 
use 256-colour images in a WordPerfect document, you might want 
to either reduce them to sixteen colours or dither them to 
monochrome, depending upon what you'll be outputting them to.


MSP FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 1
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
These are the image files used by the paint program which came 
with Microsoft Windows version 2. Don't confuse these with PCX 
files... some versions of Windows 2 came with a Windows 
implementation of PC Paintbrush from ZSoft as well. The two 
programs... and the two file formats... are not compatible. MSP 
files are monochrome only.


IFF/LBM FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 8
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
These started out on the Amiga. The IFF file standard is 
extremely flexible, and allows all sorts of things besides 
images to be stored in IFF files. IFF files are found on the PC 
having been ported from Amiga systems. They are also created on 
the PC by several applications such as Electronic Arts' Deluxe 
Paint package and Digital Vision's Computer Eyes video scanner 
board. In the first case they are given the extension LBM. In 
the second they are given the extension CE. The basic file 
structure is the same, however.

Deluxe Paint is a bit of a problem in the way it deals 
with IFF files, actually. This affects 256 colour files. Its 
native format is a subclass of IFF called PBM, and compresses its 
images as bytes. It's somewhat unique to Deluxe Paint, and 
Electronic Arts won't tell anyone quite how it works. You can 
actually work it out to a large degree, but every so often a file 
created in this format in the way it seems like it should be done 
refuses to load into Deluxe Paint.

The standard form for IFF image files is called ILBM, 
compressing all images as planes. This is much slower, but it 
means that files thus compressed will be readable by pretty well 
all IFF readers... even if you port 'em back to the Amiga. This 
is how Graphic Workshop creates IFF files. Unfortunately, there's 
a problem with old versions of Deluxe Paint which will 
occasionally cause them to stop reading one of these files part way 
through the image. This happens to IFF files from sources other 
than Graphic Workshop, so it's probably a bug in these versions 
of Deluxe Paint. It appears to have been rectified in more recent 
releases.

If you encounter an image which when converted into an 
IFF file will not read into Deluxe Paint, use the /IFN command 
line switch when you run Graphic Workshop. This will disable the 
IFF compression. Uncompressed files read into Deluxe Paint with 
no difficulty.

You can permanently set IFF compression off when you install 
Graphic Workshop if you like.

Note that Graphic Workshop only reads "pure" IFF files, and will 
not handle the countless variations on the format which have 
appeared on the Amiga. Specifically, it does not read hold and 
modify, or HAM, files.


BMP FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 24
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
These are the files which are used as "wallpaper" under Windows 
3. They can be created using the version of PC Paintbrush 
supplied with Windows.

BMP files use no image compression, as the intention appears to 
be to make them fast to load. Plan on your BMP files being very 
large.

There is a very important aspect of colour BMP files which you 
should bear in mind when you use this format. Windows uses a 
fixed palette which Windows Paint cannot go about changing, as 
doing so would make the screen and border colours change too. 

This means that transferring an image to the BMP format will 
generally result in some colour shifts when BMP files are 
imported into Windows applications.

The BMP format can support 24-bit files, which Graphic Workshop 
does generate. However, as of this writing importing a 24-bit 
BMP image into Windows Paint results in a noticeable colour 
shift. This appears to be a peculiarity of Windows Paint.


PIC FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 24 (WELL, 16, ACTUALLY)
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
These should not be confused with Lotus 1-2-3 PIC drawing files.

PIC files are created by PC Paint (not PC Paintbrush) and are 
used by Grasp, among other things. They come in many flavours. 
Graphic Workshop has been tested with the most common ones. In 
theory it should support them all, but that's only a theory.

PIC files are structured exceedingly weirdly, especially in their 
sixteen-colour manifestations. For this reason, it's necessary 
for Graphic Workshop to create a temporary scratch file while 
it's packing or unpacking a sixteen-colour PIC file. You will 
note that upon beginning to read or write one, the bar graph will 
appear to pause for a few seconds before it starts to move.

By default, the temporary file will be written to the current 
directory. However, you can direct it to somewhere else by 
including the following line in your environment, for example:

        SET GWSTEMP=D:\
or 
        SET TEMP=D:\

This will cause the temporary file to be written to the root 
directory of drive D:. You can, of course, specify any path you 
like. If drive D: is a RAM drive, this will speed up the packing 
and unpacking of sixteen-colour PIC files considerably.

See the section of this document which deals with memory for more 
information about environment variables.

As of this writing, the PIC format supports high-colour images 
having fifteen or sixteen bits of colour and in theory supports 
true colour, with twenty-four bits of colour. In fact, the latter 
is still a bit flaky, and is not supported in Graphic Workshop.

True colour images converted to the PIC format will be written as 
fifteen-bit high-colour files.


TGA FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 24
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
The Truevision Targa format is used by several high end paint 
programs and things like ray tracing packages. It can handle 
images with up to sixteen million unique colours. You might want 
to read the discussion of images with 24-bit colour elsewhere in 
this document.

There are a lot of variations on TGA files, and Graphic Workshop 
does not handle them all as yet. Specifically, it only handles 
uncompressed and run length compressed files. It ignores all 
alpha channel information.

You can configure Graphic Workshop to write 24-bit images to the 
Targa format with either 24 or 16 bits of colour. Selecting 24 
bits will give you the best colour fidelity, but it will also 
create pretty large files. Selecting 16 bits will reduce the file 
size by about a third, at the the cost of a bit of colour 
resolution. In practice, it takes a pretty good eye to tell the 
difference. If you're using a high colour screen driver with 
Graphic Workshop you won't be able to tell the difference at all, 
as high colour boards only show you 16 bits of colour.


EPS FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 8
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
The EPS format... encapsulated PostScript... isn't really a 
bitmapped format at all. However, it may contain bitmapped data.

PostScript cannot be interpreted directly by most PC 
applications. As such, an EPS file which is to be imported into 
an application such as Ventura Publisher or PageMaker also 
includes a "preview". A preview is a small black and white TIFF 
image which will show you a rough idea of what the EPS file will 
look like.

If you import an EPS file into Ventura, for example, the screen 
image you see will be the preview but the data printed to your 
printer will be the PostScript data itself.

Graphic Workshop can transform other file formats with between 
one and eight bits of colour information... between two and 256 
colours... into EPS files. Images with more than two colours will 
be turned into PostScript halftones.

If you attempt to view or otherwise read an EPS file from within 
Graphic Workshop, you will see the preview image, not the actual 
PostScript data. This will look the same as the source data if 
you have translated a monochrome file to EPS, and it will look 
like a very coarse Bayer dither of the source otherwise.

Please note that the EPS files which Graphic Workshop creates are 
only intended to be printed. You cannot read them into 
applications such as Corel Draw or Adobe Illustrator. These 
applications will not accept the large mounts of bitmapped data 
which a Graphic Workshop EPS file contains.

For the most part, using EPS files in this way is no longer 
necessary. Applications which import EPS files will usually allow 
you to import TIFF files as well, which will provide you with 
much better halftoning and screen control.

If you tell Graphic Workshop to include a preview image in the 
EPS files it creates, it will write a temporary file to your disk 
while it's writing the actual PostScript data. You will 
note that the bar graph will pause for a while at the end of its 
travel during the write process.

By default, the temporary file will be written to the current 
directory. However, you can direct it to somewhere else by 
including the following line in your environment, for example:

        SET GWSTEMP=D:\
or 
        SET TEMP=D:\

This will cause the temporary file to be written to the root 
directory of drive D:. You can, of course, specify any path you 
like. If drive D: is a RAM drive, this will speed up the packing 
and unpacking of EPS files considerably.

See the section of this document which deals with memory for more 
information about environment variables.

Note that if you attempt to convert or print an EPS file under 
Graphic Workshop, the TIFF preview image will be read, not the 
actual EPS information.

Note also that if you attempt to read an EPS file without a 
preview, Graphic Workshop will tell you that it has encountered a 
file read error. The EPS file itself may be fine... 
Graphic Workshop however, can only read previews.


EXE FILES (SELF DISPLAYING PICTURES) - MAXIMUM BITS: 8
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
You can convert images with between two and 256 colours to files 
with the extension EXE. Such files are self displaying pictures. 
For example, if you have a file called PICTURE.GIF and you use 
Graphic Workshop to translate it to PICTURE.EXE, typing PICTURE 
from the command line will cause the picture to display on your 
screen.

Pictures written into the EXE format can subsequently be read 
back into any other format. However, note that Graphic Workshop 
can only read EXE files which it has created. Use the F4 key to 
check out EXE files if you aren't sure whether they're pictures 
or programs.

Graphic Workshop will not read self displaying pictures written 
by applications not created by Alchemy Mindworks.

In order for an EXE picture to display, the system which you 
attempt to run it on must have a card which supports enough 
colours to show the picture under Graphic Workshop. Specifically, 
you will need a VGA card to display an EXE picture with 256 
colours, at least an EGA card to display one with 16 colours and 
so on.

EXE picture files support CGA, EGA, VGA and Hercules cards only.

Pictures displayed by converting them to EXE files and running 
them can't be panned around, even if they're larger than your 
screen. Hitting any key will return you to DOS.

An EXE picture created by Graphic Workshop will attempt to 
autodetect the display card type in the machine it's run on. Some 
cards are sufficiently weird that this isn't always possible. The 
VGA cards in PS/2 systems are an example of this... IBMs are no 
longer really IBM compatible in this regard. To get around this, 
you can run EXE pictures with display card command line 
overrides. These are the command line switches an EXE picture 
will accept:

/CGA    - Assume there's a CGA card in the system.
/EGA    - Assume there's an EGA card in the system.
/VGA    - Assume there's a VGA card in the system.
/HER    - Assume there's a Hercules card in the system.
/VER    - Display the version number of the EXE file.
/PAR    - Assume there's a Paradise card in the system.
/ATI    - Assume there's an ATI card in the system.
/TNG    - Assume there's a Tseng 4000 card in the system.
/TRI    - Assume there's a Trident 8900 card in the system.
/OAK    - Assume there's an Oak Technologies card in the system.
/VSA    - Assume there's a VESA card in the system.
/DIS    - Disable the return to text mode.
/Wnn    - Wait nn (00 through 99) seconds and then return to DOS.
/KEY    - Allow keyboard hits to abort waiting  
/FAD    - Fade in and out (VGA cards only)

If you run an EXE picture with a question mark as its command 
line argument, it will display a list of its command line 
switches, just like Graphic Workshop itself.

The command line switches assume that you're using DOS 3.0 or 
better.

In its standard VGA or autodetection modes, a 256-colour EXE 
picture will display at 640 by 480 by 256 colours if it detects a 
super VGA card it recognizes, or at at 320 by 200 pixels. This 
assumes that your card has at least 512 kilobytes of memory in 
board and that your monitor will sync at this resolution. 

If you have a super VGA card which the EXE pictures support, but 
which they do not detect correctly, you can force them into the 
appropriate mode with one of the switches from the foregoing 
list.

You can create EXE picture files either compressed or 
uncompressed. This can be selected either permanently through 
GWSINSTL or by using the appropriate command line  
switches when you run GWS.EXE. Uncompressed files 
display quickly but take up a lot of disk space. Compressed files 
usually save space but display a bit slower. Note that especially 
in complex scanned or dithered images, you might find that 
compression actually results in a larger file than leaving an 
image uncompressed.

If you don't have need of self-displaying pictures, you might wish 
to remove the EXE resource from Graphic Workshop's resource file, 
as it will cause the main file finder screen to become cluttered 
with other, unrelated EXE files which may be lying around your 
directories. One EXE file looks pretty much like another until 
Graphic Workshop attempts to unpack it. See the section on 
resources in the accessory disk for help in doing this.

Note that when you hit a key to end the display of a picture, the 
ASCII code of the key will be returned as a DOS error level, 
which can be trapped in a batch file. If your picture terminates 
because of the /Wnn switch instead, the error level will be zero.

You can use the /DIS, /Wnn, /KEY and /FAD switches to create 
slide shows and interactive displays. Use a batch file to set up 
the pictures you want to work with. The /DIS switch will make the 
transition between images clean... just make sure you omit it 
from the last image you display.

Here's a typical batch file:

        ECHO OFF
        PICTURE1 /FAD /DIS /W10 
        PICTURE2 /FAD /DIS /W10 
        PICTURE3 /FAD /W10      

Note that if you use the /W00 switch, your image will return 
immediately to DOS or to whatever application spawned it. This is 
useful, for example, should you want to use an EXE picture to 
display an image and then have the program that called it further 
modify the screen contents.

The /FAD switch times its fades based on the vertical refresh 
rate of your monitor, something which doesn't change from system 
to system. As such, its fades should take about the same amount 
of time no matter what machine you run your EXE pictures on. 
Likewise, the time delays set by the /Wnn switch are based on the 
system clock, and are processor independent.


TXT FILES (TEXT FILES) - MAXIMUM BITS: 1
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Graphic Workshop will create a 640 by 400 pixel, two colour image 
from any ASCII text file. The text will by truncated at 80 
columns and 25 lines if exceeds either dimension. It can contain 
both alphabetic characters and high order IBM block graphic 
characters. Tabs are expanded and all other control characters 
except for carriage returns are ignored.

Note that a suitable text file must be in pure ASCII, not a 
proprietary word processor format. It must have the extension 
TXT.

Note that the TXT format is only capable of reading files. You 
cannot write a TXT file from Graphic Workshop... there's no 
sensible way for Graphic Workshop to create a text file from a 
graphic. 

Note that as long as you're attempting to read files, you can 
treat text files just like other monochrome graphic files from 
within Graphic Workshop. As such, you can view them, convert from 
TXT and so on.

As with the EXE file format, you might wish to remove the TXT 
resource from Graphic Workshop if you don't need it and find it's 
causing a lot of spurious TXT files to be displayed in the 
Graphic Workshop file finder screen... assuming you use the TXT 
extension for something. 


HALO CUT FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 8
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
The CUT format is exceedingly awkward, and Graphic Workshop makes 
a few assumptions about how CUT files will be used in order to 
make it workable. To begin with, CUT files don't know how many 
colours they have in them. They rely on a second file, called a 
PAL file, to define their colours.

Graphic Workshop looks for a PAL file to decide whether a CUT 
file has two bits or eight bits of colour. If it doesn't find a 
PAL file with the same name as your CUT file, it assumes that the 
CUT file in question only has two bits of colour. Otherwise, it 
assumes that there are 256 colours in the file.

Files written to the CUT format from Graphic Workshop will appear 
as two-colour files if they started out that way or as 256-colour 
files if they had more than two colours initially.

If you're using CUT files and have any suggestions to improve 
Graphic Workshop's handling of them, or if you encounter problems 
with its CUT files, please get in touch with us. The CUT format, 
while occasionally requested, turned out to be very weird.

You can use the CUT format to fool Graphic Workshop into 
promoting monochrome pictures to 256 colour pictures. Here's how 
to do it. In this example, we'll convert the EXAMPLE1.IMG file 
included with this package to a 256-colour GIF file.

1. Convert EXAMPLE1.IMG to EXAMPLE1.CUT.
2. Convert EXAMPLE2.GIF to EXAMPLE2.CUT
3. Hit S to shell to DOS.
4. Rename EXAMPLE2.PAL to EXAMPLE1.PAL.
5. Type EXIT to return to Graphic Workshop.
6. Convert EXAMPLE1.CUT to EXAMPLE1.GIF.

Having done this, EXAMPLE1.GIF will prove to have 256 colours. 
You can delete all the CUT and PAL files involved.

This procedure works because it creates a PAL file for 
EXAMPLE1.CUT, even though by rights it shouldn't have one. 
Graphic Workshop will thereupon assume that EXAMPLE1.CUT is a 
256-colour image, since there's a PAL file for it. 

The original EXAMPLE2.GIF's palette has black for colour zero and 
something approaching white for colour one... these are the 
colours that will be assigned to the original black and white 
pixels in EXAMPLE1.CUT. If you have Desktop Paint 256 or some 
other paint package that will let you change colour values 
around, you might want to create a version of EXAMPLE2.GIF with 
its first colour set to pure black and its second colour set to 
pure white for this procedure.


WINDOWS RLE FILES - MAXIMUM BITS: 8
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
The RLE format is actually a variation on the BMP format 
discussed previously. It has two primary uses under Windows. It 
can be used to create compressed wallpaper files and it can be 
used to replace the opening Windows logo screen with one of your 
own choosing.

The RLE format uses compression, unlike BMP files, and as such 
wallpaper created as RLE files will occupy less space on your 
disk. At least, it should. If you store very complex scanned or 
dithered images in the RLE format, they may confuse the run 
length encoding procedure and actually result in larger files 
than they would have created as BMP files.

To use an RLE file as wallpaper, place the file you wish to use 
in your \WINDOWS subdirectory. Use the Windows control panel to 
select your wallpaper file as you normally would... the only 
difference is that you will have to type in the name of the RLE 
file you wish to use, as the file selector in the control panel 
only looks for BMP files.

Technically, RLE files used as wallpaper should take a little 
longer to load. In practice, this is rarely noticeable.

Using an RLE file to change the startup Windows logo is a bit 
tricky, but it's arguably worth the effort if you're tired of 
looking at the Microsoft ad. You will need a sixteen-colour RLE 
image of the dimensions 640 by 480... 640 by 350 if you use an 
EGA card. The RLE file should be no larger than 40 or 50 
kilobytes, and smaller if possible. For this example, we'll allow 
that the file is called NEWLOGO.RLE, located in the \WINDOWS 
subdirectory.

Go to the \WINDOWS\SYSTEM subdirectory and issue the following 
command at the DOS prompt.

COPY /B WIN.CNF+VGALOGO.LGO+C:\WINDOWS\NEWLOGO.RLE C:\WINDOWS\WIN2.COM

This will create a new program called WIN2.COM. If you start 
Windows by typing WIN2, rather than WIN, you will see your logo 
rather than Microsoft's. This will not affect your normal WIN.COM 
program.

There are several things to be aware of in this procedure. The 
most important is that the resulting WIN2.COM cannot be bigger 
than 65535 bytes, which is why you must keep your RLE file down 
to a modest size. If it exceeds these limits, WIN2.COM will 
refuse to run.

Secondly, if your RLE file is of dimensions other than those of 
your screen, it will appear incorrectly placed.

Thirdly, if you will be using an EGA card, replace the 
VGALOGO.LGO file, above, with EGALOGO.LGO.

Note that when a file is converted to the sixteen-colour RLE 
format by Graphic Workshop, it is permanently remapped to the 
Windows default palette. This may result in a noticeable colour 
shift for some images.

Graphic Workshop will read most RLE files from other sources. One 
known exception is the VGALOGO.RLE file provided with Windows 
3.1.


PFS ART FILES - MAXIMUM BITS - 1
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
These are files used by Spinnaker's PFS applications. They store 
graphics as uncompressed monochrome images. Graphic Workshop will 
only read and write uncompressed ART files. The F4 function will 
tell you if you have a compressed ART file.


SUN RASTER RAS FILES - MAXIMUM BITS - 24
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Sun raster files are native to the Sun unix environment. They can 
be uncompressed or run length compressed. There are also a number 
of obscure compression standards which Graphic Workshop does not 
support at present. These rarely turn up... the Get Info function 
will tell you if you've encountered one.

Sun raster files appear with a variety of file extensions. 
Graphic Workshop uses the extension RAS. You might have to rename 
your files to use this extension if they're named something else. 
Extensions for Sun raster files on a unix system can include 
ras, rast, im1, im8, im24 and im32.

Note that some 24-bit Sun raster files were created with their 
red and blue colour values erroneously interchanged.


JPEG (JOINT PICTURE EXPERTS GROUP) JPG - MAXIMUM BITS - 24
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
The JPEG format is actually a combination of several elements, 
and it's important that you understand what it does before you 
use it. The JPEG algorithm reduces the amount of space a 
compressed image will occupy on disk by selectively removing 
details from the image. Pictures with fewer details compress more 
effectively. The amount of detail removal is defined by the JPEG 
quality item of the Setup dialog box.

At the default value of 75, relatively little picture degradation 
will take place, but a significant amount of compression will be 
obtained. At lower values you'll experience still better 
compression, but with a marked loss of image quality.

The Independent JPEG Group, from whom this JPEG algorithm was 
obtained, have also defined a file format to hold JPEG files in, 
called JFIF. It's typically stored with the extension JPG.

Note that several other programs, such as Lead Tools and Image 
Alchemy have defined their own formats with the extension JPG. 
They are not compatible with the JPEG functions in Graphic 
Workshop. If you encounter an error reading a JPG file, you 
probably have a file from one of these sources.

Once an image has been converted to JPEG, its lost details are 
lost for good. Note also that repeatedly reading and writing the 
same image in the JPG format will successively degrade it.

If you convert an image from another format, such as GIF, to JPG 
and then from JPG back to GIF, the final GIF file will usually be 
smaller than the original.

At present all images converted into the JPG format will have a 
minimum of 256 colours.

The legal requirement for using IJG's code is that we state: This 
software is based in part on the work of the Independent JPEG 
Group.  (Thanks, lads... it was a fine bit of work.)


HRZ SLOW SCAN TELEVISION - MAXIMUM BITS - 24
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Images in the HRZ format always have 24 bits of colour and the 
fixed dimensions 256 by 240 pixels. Images with differing 
dimensions will be padded or cropped to fit in this space when 
they're translated to HRZ. Images with fewer colours will be 
promoted to 24 bits. This is a fairly specialized format... if 
you aren't using slow scan television, you probably don't need 
it. You might well ask what slow scan television is... damned if 
we know. Conventional television seems slow enough.

Graphic Workshop only reads uncompressed HRZ files.


UUE UUENCODED INTERNET GRAPHICS
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
The UUE format isn't a graphic file format at all. Rather, it's a 
way of encoding binary files, such as graphics, so they can be 
sent over text-only electronic mail systems, such as Internet e-
mail and Usenet newsgroups. The process of uuencoding a graphic 
turns it into text... albeit fairly mysterious-looking text... 
which can be mailed. The received uuencoded file would be 
uudecoded to return it to its former state.
        
If this means almost nothing to you, you're probably not involved 
with the Internet, and can safely ignore this section.

Graphic Workshop will read the images from uuencoded text. The 
file extension for your uuencoded text must be UUE. The text 
itself can contain multiple sections if you like... the software 
will attempt to figure out where the breaks are and assemble the 
original graphic into a correct file.

Graphic Workshop's UUE decoder can work in strict or relaxed 
mode. This has to do with how it works with UUE files with 
multiple sections.

In strict mode, the standard begin mode filename fields must 
precede the first uuencoded block in your source text file. Each 
subsequent section for multiple section uuencoded files must 
start with a BEGIN line of some sort and end with an END line. A 
uuencoded graphic that appears as multiple sections must have all 
the sections concatenated into a single UUE file. Note that 
Graphic Workshop does very little validity checking for uuencoded 
data... damaged source data, sections out of sequence or 
incorrectly formed uuencoded headers or trailers may cause 
Graphic Workshop's uudecoder to create an incorrect final binary 
file, and hence a mangled graphic.

In relaxed mode, Graphic Workshop will decode any line which 
checks out as valid uuencoded data, ignoring all the BEGIN and 
END markers save for the first one.

The strict mode guarentees you a correct decode if you UUE files 
have the currect section markers, but not all uuencoded data has 
these. The relaxed mode can usually handle files without headers 
properly, but some pathological cases will crop up in which 
spurious data is decoded.

The UUE decoder mode can be set using the Relaxed UUE Decoding 
item in the Graphic Workshop Override dialog, and through page F2 of 
GWSINSTL. If you encounter a UUE file that doesn't display 
properly, try toggling this switch. In most cases you'll want to 
leave it in relaxed mode.

Keep in mind when you're using the uudecoder in Graphic Workshop
that whereas human beings can easily distinguish between the 
header and other flotsam which often appears before and after 
uuencoded graphics in e-mail, software is much less adept at this 
sort of thing. If you encounter uuencoded files that won't read, 
look at them with a text editor to see if there's something 
obviously peculiar about them. Should one of your images appear 
incomplete or obviously damaged, your UUE source file probably 
hasn't been created to the above specification... and perhaps the 
relaxed mode of the decoder can't quite figure out what's 
happening to it. In this case, you'll have to open it with a text 
editor and do a bit of hand massaginging between the section 
breaks. Specifically, just delete all the intermediate text and 
leave the uuencoded data as one long block.

If you use a news reader that will append multiple messages to 
the same file, you should be able to create suitable source UUE 
files for Graphic Workshop to read with no difficulty.

Note that when it decodes a UUE file, Graphic Workshop will 
ascertain the file type for the internal file name stored in the 
begin  header of the first section, but it will form the body of 
the destination file name for translation or other processes from 
the body of the UUE file name.

You can treat UUE files like any other graphic file format so 
long as they contain graphics in a format that Graphic Workshop
recognizes.


SCREEN CAPTURE
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Registered users of Graphic Workshop will receive the Graphic 
Workshop screen capture utility, GWSCAP. This will capture 
graphic screens from most of the VGA and super VGA graphic screen 
modes to PCX files. It will also capture text screens to sixteen-
colour PCX files, effectively making a picture out of your text. 
It's very small... occupying about eight kilobytes of memory... 
and dead easy to use.

Please read GWSCAP.DOC for more information about configuring and 
using the screen capture. 


24-BIT FILES
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Most of the image file formats commonly found in use on a PC 
which support colour do so using a palette structure, as this is 
the way most PC full colour display cards work. An image stored 
in a palette structure file will have a maximum of 256 unique 
colours, drawn from a potential palette of 16 million. In fact, a 
VGA card can only support a potential palette of about a quarter 
of a million colours. There is some theoretical loss in colour 
resolution in displaying, say, a GIF file on a VGA card.

For practical purposes this colour arrangement is sufficient to 
reproduce pretty convincing colour photographs. However, for a 
number of reasons, high end photographic manipulation software, 
colour separation software and so on works better with a non-
palette image, one in which every pixel is represented as a 
distinct colour. In these images, every pixel consists of three 
bytes of colour information, one each for the red, green and blue 
components of the pixel's colour. Such pictures are referred to 
as true colour, RGB or 24-bit pictures.

Among the formats which currently support 24-bit images are 
Targa, PCX, BMP and TIFF.

Viewing a 24-bit image on a PC equipped with a VGA or super-VGA 
card can present Graphic Workshop with something of a problem. 
Such an image can have up to sixteen million different colours in 
it, while many VGA cards can support only 256 different colours 
at a time.

In order to deal with 24-bit images, Graphic Workshop may 
have to "dither" them. Dithering involves creating a 
simplified... albeit slightly coarser... version of the source 
image. Dithered images in the view mode of Graphic Workshop will 
give you an idea of what you 24-bit picture looks like, but 
they're always an approximation.

If you attempt to view a 24-bit image on a system equipped with 
an EGA or VGA card, a menu will appear to ask you how you'd like 
the 24-bit file to be handled. You can display it as a grey scale 
image if you just want to see what the picture looks like. This 
is the fastest way to view such a picture. Alternately, you can 
choose the Bayer colour dithering option

Note that the Bayer colour screen dither has been designed to be 
reasonably fast, rather than accurate. When you create an error-
diffused colour dither, as discussed next, the results will be a 
whole lot nicer to look at.

In order to convert a 24-bit image into a palette based format... 
for example, to convert a 24-bit PCX file into a GIF file... you 
must use the colour reduction function of the F9 special effects 
key. This will perform a full 256-colour error-diffused dither, 
which will usually result in a 256-colour image which is almost 
as good as the original 24-bit image was.

The colour reduction function also contains options to allow you 
to reduce a 24-bit file to lesser numbers of colours. Choosing 
fewer than 256 colours will produce a smaller file in some cases, 
but it will also leave you with a less faithful representation of 
your original colour image.


A WORD ABOUT MEMORY
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Graphic Workshop will use whatever memory you have going. If you 
ask it to do something which needs a large amount of memory, it 
will attempt to allocate space in your extended or expanded 
memory pool, or use DOS memory if there isn't enough extra 
memory. If your extra memory type is set to virtual, it will try 
to allocate DOS memory first.

There are three sorts of "extra" memory which Graphic Workshop 
can use, to wit, extended, expanded and virtual. Extended memory 
is also called XMS memory, and is only available on '286 and 
better systems. Expanded memory, also called EMS or LIM memory, is 
available if you have a LIM board and driver in your machine. 
Virtual memory means using a big disk file and making believe 
it's memory. Virtual memory is very slow compared to real 
memory.

You must tell Graphic Workshop what to do about extra memory 
when you install it. See the section on installation.

In addition to the three foregoing types of extra memory, 
Graphic Workshop can be configured to use "extended or 
virtual" or "expanded or virtual" memory. If one of these options 
is chosen, Graphic Workshop will attempt to allocate a 
buffer from extended or expanded memory if it can't do so with 
DOS memory. If it's unable to allocate a buffer in extra memory, 
it will switch to virtual memory and see if its luck improves. If 
there's no room for a virtual memory buffer, it will give up and 
return an error saying that it can't allocate memory.

By default, Graphic Workshop configured to use virtual memory 
will use the current drive and directory to write its temporary 
files. You can change this by adding a line to your environment 
with the SET command such as:

        GWSTEMP=D:\
or
        TEMP=D:\

In this case, any virtual memory temporary files which 
Graphic Workshop wants to create will be written to the root 
of drive D:. If you have a RAM disk, you should use the TEMP 
environment variable to tell Graphic Workshop to use it for virtual 
memory operations, as this will speed things up considerably.

Note that if both TEMP and GWSTEMP environment variables exist on 
your system, GWSTEMP will be used.

Graphic Workshop might run in restricted memory, such as that 
which is found on a really old PC or when running "shelled out" 
of another program. However, it can do nasty things when it's 
really starved for memory. Some virtual memory operations will 
not work in this condition, and if it's really stuck for RAM... 
if there's only a few tens of kilobytes free... it may manage to 
crash. Try not to run it when there's almost no room left for it 
to store things. The help menu will tell you how much memory is 
free.

Graphic Workshop frequently swaps blocks of code and data in and 
out of memory. In addition to the memory required for your 
pictures, Graphic Workshop must have memory to manage its 
resources and to allocate small scratch buffers. This is called 
memory "overhead". It's possible for Graphic Workshop to 
allocate a lot of DOS memory for a picture file and subsequently 
be unable to allocate enough memory for the resource which will 
manipulate the picture.

To avoid this situation, Graphic Workshop reserves a fixed amount 
of memory for its own use before it attempts to allocate an image 
buffer. The amount of this fixed memory is adjustable through the 
GWSINSTL program, as is discussed in the section on installation. 
As it's set in the distribution version of the software, it 
should be adequate for all the operations the package can 
perform. There are a few hypothetical cases in which this might 
not prove true, for example, in unpacking enormously wide GIF 
files. If you run into problems with allocating scratch buffers or 
resource buffers, try increasing the memory overhead.

Note that Graphic Workshop comes configured to use virtual memory. 
Use GWSINSTL to change this when you're sure what sort of extra 
memory is in your system.

Finally, note that in order to access the extended or expanded 
memory in your system, Graphic Workshop must be able to locate a 
suitable extended or expanded memory driver. Simply having 
several megabytes of chips on your motherboard will not make that 
memory accessible unless you have the appropriate driver in place 
and working.

To help you better understand how Graphic Workshop is using the 
memory in your system, have a look at the Wait box that appears 
when a file is being processed. If extra memory of some type is 
being used, the word "Wait" will be printed in the same colour as 
the text below the status bar. If conventional DOS memory is 
being used, the word "Wait" will be printed in a different 
colour.


A WORD ABOUT MICE
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
You can use a mouse to operate Graphic Workshop, as well 
as the conventional keyboard interface. Because Graphic Workshop is 
primarily a text mode application, there are limits to what the 
mouse support can provide. We've tried to apply mouse functions 
where they made sense and to ignore the mouse where having it 
available would have really meant stretching a point.

You must have a Microsoft-compatible mouse driver loaded for the 
mouse to work under Graphic Workshop. This will be handled by 
running MOUSE.COM... usually a fixture of your AUTOEXEC.BAT 
file... or by having MOUSE.SYS included in your CONFIG.SYS file. 
If no mouse functions are available under Graphic Workshop, you 
don't have a mouse driver loaded or your mouse is not Microsoft 
compatible.

The mouse cursor will appear as a white diamond. Note that there 
are two other mouse options available... no mouse support at all 
or the conventional text mode block cursor. Alternate drivers to 
handle these are available on the Graphic Workshop accessory disk, 
discussed elsewhere in this document.

Here's a quick overview of what the mouse does under Graphic Workshop.

- You can select a file from the main menu by clicking on it.
- You can toggle a file's tagged status by double clicking with 
  the left mouse button.
- You can view a file by double clicking with the right mouse 
  button.
- You can select "Yes" for any dialog that prompts you for a 
  decision by clicking inside the box and "No" by clicking 
  outside it.
- You can banish a message box by clicking anywhere on the 
  screen.
- You can invoke the function of any key with a prompt by 
  clicking on the prompt.
- You can page up in the main menu by clicking at the right side 
  of the screen and page down by clicking at the left side of the 
  screen.
- You can exit the View mode by clicking with the right mouse 
  button.


IF YOU ENCOUNTER A PROBLEM
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
While we have tested Graphic Workshop thoroughly, it's possible 
that you may encounter a situation we hadn't anticipated, and 
perhaps a file which will not read. If this happens, we would be 
interested in knowing about it so we can deal with it in the next 
release of Graphic Workshop. Here's how to report a problem to 
us.

Copy your CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT files onto a floppy. 
Include a screen dump of each page of GWSINSTL as it was set up 
when the problem occurred. Alternately, write down the settings.

Copy the image files which resulted in the problem and provide a 
description of what you did and what happened.

If we can't recreate it, we probably won't be able to fix it.

Before you contact us with a problem in Graphic Workshop, please 
make sure you've read this document thoroughly and that you 
understand how the software should work. Many problem reports 
which receive aren't problems with the software at all. 

You can also ZIP up your problem files and upload them to our 
bulletin board.


USING THE MAIN MENU
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Graphic Workshop always shows you all the names of the image 
files it knows how to deal with in the current directory, along 
with all the visible subdirectory names, if any are present. If 
you are in a subdirectory, you will also see a subdirectory entry 
which is two periods.

The cursor mover keys will move the file selector bar around. If 
you move it to a directory entry... shown in dim text... and hit 
Enter, you will move into that directory. If you select the two 
period entry, you will move back up your directory tree by one 
step.

You can also select a new directory by hitting Alt L. A directory 
and drive selection dialog will appear. Navigate to the drive and 
directory you wish to work in and then select the [ OK ] entry.

If there are too many files in your current directory to see all 
at once, Graphic Workshop will organize them into pages. The PgUp 
and PgDn keys will step you through the pages. Clicking at the 
right and left sides of the main menu screen will also invoke the 
paging functions.

Here are the keys which Graphic Workshop recognizes for basic 
file handling and session functions. Clicking in the appropriate 
prompts if you have a mouse will perform the same functions.

Hitting the question mark or clicking in the "? for Help" message 
at the top of the screen will cause Graphic Workshop to display 
a menu of the keys which control the main file screen 
of Graphic Workshop. This box also tells you how much free memory is 
available, the display card you have Graphic Workshop configured 
to use and the type of extra memory it's set up for.
 
The Esc key will allow you to quit Graphic Workshop and return to 
DOS.

If you hit "T" the currently selected file name will be 
"tagged". The "U" key will untag it. The batch operations 
described later in this document will work with multiple 
files if you have some of them tagged. If you hit "C", all the 
tags will be cleared, and if you hit "A" all the files will be 
tagged. Clicking on a file name with the left mouse button will 
toggle its tagged status.

Note that for the graphic functions of Graphic Workshop... the 
ones accessed by the function keys... the currently selected file 
will be processed if there are no tagged files. Otherwise, each 
of the tagged files will be processed in turn.

If you hit "L" Graphic Workshop will allow you to log in a new 
disk drive. A box will appear prompting you for the drive letter 
you want to log into. If you it Alt L, a more complex dialog will 
appear allowing you to select a new drive and directory. This 
will be useful, among other things, for users of Novell networks.

If you hit "D" you will be prompted to delete the current file. 
Note that this is not a batch command... it only works on one 
file at a time. 

If you hit "R" you can rename the current file. Note that it the 
renamed file will have the same extension as the old one, no 
matter what extension you give it.

If you hit "S", Graphic Workshop will attempt to shell out to the 
DOS prompt. If you do this, Graphic Workshop will still be in 
memory. Type EXIT at the DOS prompt to return to it right where 
you left off. If you change drives or subdirectories while you 
have the DOS prompt active, Graphic Workshop will restore the 
previous drive and subdirectory when you return to it.

If you hit "O", a list of configuration overrides will appear. 
These pertain only to your current session, and will not change 
the default configuration settings as chosen through GWSINSTL. 
See the section of this document which deals with configuration 
for help with the overrides.

The alphabetic control keys can be upper or lower case. Other 
keys will be ignored.


HELP
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
If you get lost, hit ? for help, or click in the help prompt in 
the upper right corner of the screen. Hit ? again or click in the 
quick help screen for detailed topical help. 

When the detailed help window opens, select a topic by using the 
cursor mover keys to position the highlighted item selector or 
just click on one of the dimmed topic names with the left button 
of your mouse.

Clicking with the right button of the mouse or hitting Esc will 
move backward through help topics. Clicking with the left mouse 
button outside the help window will close the help and return to 
the main menu of Graphic Workshop. Clicking in the prompts at the 
bottom of the help window will invoke their functions.


VIEWING FILES AND ADJUSTING COLOUR
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
If you place the selector bar on a file name and hit Enter, 
Graphic Workshop will attempt to show you the file. It will start 
by showing you a wait box, which has a bar graph in it to 
indicate the status of what you've asked Graphic Workshop to do. 
When the picture is fully unpacked, Graphic Workshop will switch 
to your display card's graphic mode and show you the picture.

Double clicking on a file name with your right mouse button will 
also invoke the View function.

You can always abort any operation when the wait box is visible 
by hitting the Esc key.

If the picture is larger than your screen, the cursor keys will 
allow you to pan around it. Normally you will pan around in small 
increments. If you hold down the left Shift key when you hit a 
cursor key, you will move around in increments of half your 
screen dimensions.

Esc will return you to the main screen, as will clicking with 
your right mouse button.

If the Ctrl key is held down when a file is selected for viewing, 
you can control the screen mode it's displayed in... assuming 
that your display card has more than one display mode. If your 
card is supported by a driver of version 2.0 or lower, holding 
down the Ctrl key will force the screen into its lowest 
resolution mode. For example, if you're looking at a 256-colour 
picture on a super VGA card, holding down the Ctrl key will force 
the screen into the 320 by 200 pixel standard VGA mode.

If you're using a driver of version 2.1 or better, holding down 
the Ctrl key will cause a menu to appear offering you a choice of 
the available display modes with the most appropriate one 
highlighted. Select a mode and hit Enter or hit Esc to let 
Graphic Workshop select the most appropriate mode, that is, what 
it would have done had you not held down the Ctrl key. 

Note that you must take your finger off the Ctrl key before you 
try to move the menu item selector. Note also that the Ctrl key 
must be held down when you hit Enter to select a file... you can 
release it thereafter. The menu will not appear until the wait 
bar finishes its travel.

You can see what version your screen driver is by looking in the 
"?" box from the main menu. Also, be aware that some drivers only 
have one screen mode available. 

Several things can go wrong in viewing a file. If you have 
installed Graphic Workshop for the wrong kind of display card, 
you might see random characters rather than a picture. In this 
case, check your installation.

If Graphic Workshop could not find enough memory to unpack your 
picture into, it will abort the process and say so.

Finally, if your picture requires more colours than your card can 
display, Graphic Workshop will tell you this. Specifically, it 
will pop up a menu which will ask you how you want it to deal 
with the colour problem. The available options will vary with the 
type of display adapter you're using and the number of colours in 
your source image.

You can force this menu to appear when you view an image by 
holding down the left Shift key when you hit the Enter key. You 
might wish to do this to view some pictures in ways other than a 
normal displayed. For example, you can preview an image dithered 
this way.

This is what the menu options do:


Display normally
----------------------
This will display the picture as if you hadn't reached this menu. 
This option will always be disabled if the menu pops up by 
itself.


Display as grey
---------------------
This is the fastest way to see what a picture with too many 
colours looks like. It will show you the image in grey scale.


Bayer dither mono
-----------------------

Floyd dither mono
-----------------------

Burkes dither mono
------------------------

Stucki dither mono
------------------------
These four options will dither your image down to monochrome. You 
might want to see the discussion on dithering later in this 
document to better understand them.


Threshold
---------------
This will display your image as a high contrast black and white 
picture.


Bayer dither colour
-------------------------
This option will display your image as a fixed eight-colour or 
a 256-colour dither, the latter for viewing 24-bit pictures on 
eight-bit displays. It's a pretty reasonable representation of a 
colour image for a quick 'n nasty preview. 


Display reversed
----------------------
This option will display your image reversed. Colour images will 
appear as negatives. 

In the sixteen and 256 colour display modes, you can make 
adjustments to the VGA colour palette while a picture is being 
displayed. The 'r' and 'R' keys will increase and decrease the 
amount of red in a picture, the 'g' and 'G' keys will adjust the 
amount of green, the 'b' and 'B' keys will adjust the amount of 
blue. The 'i' and 'I' keys will adjust the overall intensity of 
the picture. The 'c' and 'C' keys will adjust the contrast. The 
'=' key will return the picture to its normal state. Note that 
these adjustments only affect the original picture that you're 
viewing... they do not alter the palette in the file on your disk 
unless you save the changes to a new file.

If you hold down the left shift key when you hit the Esc key to 
leave the view mode, a file format menu will pop up. Select a 
format and you can save the file you've viewed and adjusted the 
colours of. The new file will be saved with "A_" before the file 
name... if your viewed and adjusted PICTURE.GIF, it would be 
saved as "A_PICTUR.GIF". In fact, you can have it saved as any 
suitable file type.

If you hit the Esc key when the file format menu pops up your new 
file will not be saved.

You can zoom in on a graphic in view mode by hitting the Z key. 
This will cause it to be scaled to fill your screen. In fact, the 
scale factor will be fiddled a bit such that it will usually fill 
your screen in one dimension only, such that it isn't distorted. 
Hitting Z again will unzoom it back to its normal perspective. 
The zoom mode will allow you to see an overview large graphics 
without a lot of panning around.

Note that there is usually a loss of displayed resolution when 
you zoom in on graphics, especially if your image has been 
dithered. 

None of the colour adjustments or panning functions will work 
while an image is zoomed in. If you hit Shift Esc to save a file 
while in zoomed mode, the un-zoomed image will be saved. To 
create a permanently zoomed file, use the scale function.


PRINTING - F1
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
You can print to any sort of LaserJet Plus compatible printer 
with one megabyte of memory or more or any sort of PostScript 
printer. You can print to any dot matrix or inkjet printer which 
is supported by a Graphic Workshop external printer driver. Note 
that if you attempt to print PostScript data to a LaserJet or a 
dot matrix printer you'll get reams of meaningless ASCII text.

Graphic Workshop comes with built in PostScript and LaserJet 
print drivers. This includes colour PostScript and LaserJet II, 
III and IV series printers. You only need an external print 
driver if you wish to print to a dot matrix or inkjet printer.

Having said this, if you will be printing colour or grey scale 
pictures to a LaserJet-compatible printer you might want to 
experiment with the external Laserjet III/4 driver supplied with 
Graphic Workshop... it will, in fact, drive any series of 
LaserJet-compatible printer. It's typically slower than the 
internal drivers and prints larger images, but you might find you 
like its results better. See the section on configuration later 
in this document.

Graphic Workshop allows you to print a picture in four 
resolution modes to laser printers. These will print your 
pictures in four possible sizes. You might want to experiment 
with them to see what they can do.

If you want your picture to fill as much of the printed page as 
possible, select the appropriate autosize mode. This will cause 
Graphic Workshop to choose the resolution and orientation which 
is most appropriate for each picture you print. Note that it will 
still select one of the four available resolutions, so your 
picture probably will not print right to the edge of the page. 

Colour and grey scale pictures printed to black and white 
PostScript printers will be reproduced as halftones. If you 
attempt to print a colour or grey scale picture to a LaserJet or 
dot matrix printer, the image will be dithered for you. The 
dither type is set using GWSINSTL. You might want to consult the 
section on dithering elsewhere in this document to help you 
choose a suitable dither.

Colour images can be printed in colour to a colour PostScript 
device and to a colour inkjet or dot matrix printer with a 
suitable driver. Colour PostScript printing can be enabled 
through GWSINSTL or with the appropriate command line switches.

Graphic Workshop will drive several colour ink jet printers though 
external drivers, as loaded through GWSINSTL, notably the 
Hewlett Packard Desktjet 500C and PaintJet printers. Note that 
these work a bit differently than monochrome printing does. They 
run at the maximum resolution of the printer, and dither the 
images printed to them. If you select a higher expansion factor, 
each pixel of the source image will be presented by a larger 
dither block, and as such will come closer to the source colour. 
This means that printing pictures larger will not only result in 
output that looks sharper, but it will also print with more 
accurate colours.

The inkjet drivers will also handle monochrome graphics, although 
the results aren't usually all that good. You can do 
substancially better using the Hewlett Packard inkjet printers 
if you use the black ink cartridge and select one of the internal 
LaserJet drivers.

Laser output can be printed in either portrait or landscape 
mode. You can set this up using GWSINSTL or the appropriate 
command line switches. Note that if you print to a PostScript 
printer in landscape mode, the printer itself will rotate the 
image data. This isn't actually all that fast for many printers. 
If you have a lot of images to print in landscape mode, you'll 
probably find that it's quicker to have Graphic Workshop rotate 
them and then print the rotated files.

The orientation setting has no effect for dot matrix printing.

You can print to ports LPT1, LPT2 or LPT3. The default printer 
port can be set up using GWSINSTL or the appropriate command line 
switches. Note that the printer port settings are ignored by 
some external printer drivers. All of the standard dot matrix 
drivers included with Graphic Workshop print to LPT1. The inkjet 
drivers will print to the printer port selected through 
GWSINSTL.

You can cause Graphic Workshop to print to a file, rather than 
directly to the disk, by using the appropriate command line 
switch. The command line switches are discussed elsewhere in this 
document. Print files are named using the name of your source 
image file and the extension PRN. Note that you can only print to 
a file for laser printer output. Dot matrix and inkjet drivers 
will ignore the print to file switch.

Each page of Graphic Workshop output can include any combination 
of data about the picture on it you like. See the installation 
section for more information about enabling this feature. 

The size and resolution of dot matrix printing is determined by 
the driver being used. 

Note that if you have a printer for which there is no driver 
available, one of the Epson FX-80 drivers will probably work, as 
most dot matrix printers support the Epson FX-80 standard. The 
print might not be as good as your printer can manage, but it'll 
be better than a blank sheet of paper.

In order to print correctly to most black and white laser 
printers, colour and grey scale images must be "expanded", that 
is, their grey scales must be adjusted to compensate for the non-
linear grey scale of the output device. The amount of 
compensation varies among different laser printers. The 
compensation values for Graphic Workshop have been chosen to 
suit an average PostScript laser printer. However, you can fine 
tune these by adjusting the Print halftone brightness and Print 
halftone contrast values in GWSINSTL. There's a more complete 
discussion of these fields in the configuration section elsewhere 
in this document.

If you liked the older fixed contrast expansion curve from 
previous versions of Graphic Workshop, change both these fields 
to 65535.

Printing is a batch function. If you tag multiple files and then 
hit F1, each will be printed.


CONVERTING - F2
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Graphic Workshop allows you to convert a file of any format into 
a file of any other format... with a few restrictions. The new 
file will have the same name as the original but a new extension. 
Converting PICTURE.MAC into an IMG file will create PICTURE.IMG. 
PICTURE.MAC will not be affected.

You can batch convert any mixture of file types using 
Graphic Workshop. Any files which are inappropriate for the 
conversion you've requested will simply be ignored. The ongoing 
status will appear at the bottom of the screen.

You cannot convert pictures having more bits of colour than the 
destination format can handle. For example, you cannot convert a 
24-bit Targa file directly to an 8-bit GIF file. You would have 
to use the F9 colour reduction facility to do this. Likewise, to 
convert a colour file to a monochrome one, you'd have to use the 
F3 dithering function.

There are a few other useful things to note about conversion. You 
can't convert to TXT files. You can convert from EXE files, 
provided they were created by Graphic Workshop. You can convert 
from EPS files, but the resulting image will be a monochrome 
TIFF preview image, and probably won't look very good. You can't 
convert from files which Graphic Workshop won't read. For 
example, you can't convert from a vector WPG file.


DITHERING - F3
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Dithering is a sort of magical process by which colour images can 
be converted into pretty attractive black and white versions for 
reproduction on a monochrome screen or a black and white laser 
printer. 

Note that source files for dithering must have more than one bit 
of colour information. 

Dithering often works a lot better if you scale the original 
image up. Graphic Workshop lets you dither with images of 
anywhere from "size as" up to 500 percent expansion if you have 
enough memory.

You can see what an image will look like dithered by using the 
view options menu in the view mode.

Note that the F3 function only dithers to monochrome. Colour 
dithering is handled by one of the functions of the F9 key.

Dithering is a fairly slow process, and the better the dithering 
algorithm, the slower it gets. Big files and really good 
dithering can take half an hour or more on a slower computer, 
although the results are usually worth it.

At its best, dithering can look better than halftoning, and a 
dithered file can be printed on both PostScript and LaserJet 
printers. Dithered files sent to a PostScript printer will print 
faster than halftoned files.

If you have Graphic Workshop dither a file, it will create a new 
file for you of the type selected and with "D_" before the name. 
Thus PICTURE.GIF could be dithered to D_PICTUR.IMG, for example. 
PICTURE.GIF would be left untouched.

The simplest... and fastest... form of dithering is a Bayer 
dither. This does not produce great results, but it's extremely 
quick. 

The remaining three dithering algorithms use what is called 
"error diffusion". These produce really nice looking dithers, but 
they're quite slow. The fastest... and least attractive... is 
Floyd-Steinberg. The best... and by far the slowest... is Stucki. 
The Burkes dither is somewhere in the middle.

All three of these dithers come in two flavours, UD... 
unidirectional... and BD... bidirectional. These options will 
produce slightly different results.

You should plan to experiment with the dithering options of 
Graphic Workshop a bit to see what it's capable of.

Dithering scans an image line by line, starting in the upper left 
corner and working down to the lower right corner. For this 
reason, you will find that if you rotate an image by ninety 
degrees, dither it and then rotate the dithered version by a 
further two hundred and seventy degrees, you'll get different 
results than you would have had you dithered the original image.        

The dithering function also includes a thresholding option. This 
will reduce a colour or grey scale image to a high contrast black 
and white graphic. If you select this option, you will see a menu 
allowing you to select the threshold level. This is the source 
pixel intensity above which destination pixels will be white. 
Setting it higher will make your destination image darker.

In dithering an image, the original brightness levels of the 
source graphic will be expanded a bit to improve the quality of 
the dither. The amount by which the grey levels are expanded is 
set by the Dither brightness and Dither contrast items of 
GWSINSTL. This will be discussed in detail later in this 
document. You might want to experiment with these values if you 
aren't happy with the quality of the dithered images Graphic 
Workshop is producing. Note that you can use the old expansion 
map by setting both these values to 65535.

Dithering is a batch function. You can tag a number of files and 
then set them up to dither unattended.


GET INFO - F4
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This box will show you some basic information about one or more 
selected files. Among other things, it will tell you how much 
memory the file needs to unpack into. You can use this number to 
figure out whether the file in question will fit in your 
available DOS memory or whether extra memory will be required, as 
was discussed previously. The amount of available DOS memory is 
available by hitting the "?" key from within the main screen.

Having said this, it's worth mentioning that this number actually 
represents the lowest memory requirement for the image in 
question. Some functions will require significantly more memory.

The last field in the Get Info box displays the file comments if 
there were any. The comments vary from format to format. In some 
cases, having nothing better to say, they'll tell you what 
software created the file.

Some file formats actually contain a lot more information than 
can be displayed in the normal Get Info box. TIFF files, for 
example, can contain the name of the artist responsible for them, 
the type of software used to create them and so on. You can get 
at this sort of optional information for formats which support it 
by using the "details" option of the F4 box when it's available. 
The arrow keys will scroll you through the detail window. Details 
are available, for example, if you get information about GIF, 
TIFF or IFF/LBM files.

If the Details option is available, hit F4 to invoke the details 
option too. Once the details appear, clicking in the upper half 
of the box will scroll up and clicking in the lower half will 
scroll down.

Note that the Get Info and details information for EPS files 
actually pertain to the TIFF preview.

You may need some external assistance in fully interpreting the 
details. 


CROPPING - F5
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This function will prompt you for a destination file type and 
then display your selected file on a dithered monochrome cropping 
screen. Your image will be scaled to fit the screen, no matter 
how big it is in real life. Initially, the exterior of the image 
will be framed by a cropping box. If you hold down the left shift 
key, the four arrow keys will adjust the upper left corner of the 
box. Note that you'll have to use the down and right keys before 
the up and left keys will do anything. If you hold down the right 
shift key, the arrow keys will move the lower right corner of the 
box. If you hit the Home key, the box will snap back to its 
original position. The co-ordinates of the upper left and lower 
right corners as well as the dimensions of the cropped fragment 
will be displayed at the top of the screen.

If you hit F10, your cropped fragment will be written to a new 
file. The file will have the name of your original file with "C_" 
appended to the front of it and the extension of the destination 
format you selected. 

If you hit Esc no destination file will be written.

The cropping function requires a revision two screen driver. 
Most of the current Graphic Workshop screen drivers will work... 
a few of the unusual ones may not have been updated. The revision 
level of revision two drivers can be found in the screen driver 
installation screen of GWSINSTL.

Cropping is a batch function. Note that if you use Esc to abort 
one cropped file in a batch, the rest of the batch will be 
aborted.

The Crop function does not have mouse support.


REVERSE - F6
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This function will create a reversed version of any image file. 
The new file will have the same name as the original file, with 
"R_" appended to the front of it. Thus, reversing PICTURE.MAC 
will leave you with R_PICTUR.MAC. If you reverse a colour image, 
you'll get a colour negative. These look weird... we haven't 
found a use for them as yet.

Reversing is a batch function.


TRANSFORM - F7
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This key will pop up a menu offering you five image 
transformations. You can rotate an image in ninety degree 
increments and you can flip it horizontally or vertically. These 
functions work on images of any number of colours. 

Note that the ninety and two hundred and seventy degree rotation 
functions will take a very long time if your images are large and 
require the use of virtual memory... this assumes that you lack 
extended or expanded memory. Them's the breaks.

Transformed images will be stored in files with "T_" in front of 
the names. Thus PICTURE.GIF will become T_PICTUR.GIF after any of 
the five transformations have been wrought upon it. If you rotate 
it and then flip the rotated image, for example, it will become 
T_T_PICT.GIF, and so on, with intermediate files along the way.

Transforming is a batch function.


SCALE - F8
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This key will allow you to scale files from 25 to 500 percent or 
to a specific dimensions. 

Your original files will not be altered when you scale them. New 
files with the prefix "S_" will be created. Thus, PICTURE.GIF 
will produce S_PICTUR.GIF after scaling.

Scaling a picture can produce some really ugly results, depending 
on what you scale. Bear in mind that scaling by integral 
values... down to seventy five or fifty percent, up to two 
hundred percent and so on... will produce less ugly results than 
scaling by arbitrary values.

There are three scaling modes available... proportional, 
anamorphic and by size. Proportional scaling will scale files by 
a percentage in both directions. Anamorphic will scale them by 
different percentages in each direction. Scaling by size will 
scale files by whatever percentages are necessary to make them 
fit in a defined number of pixels.

The scaling values you enter will be rounded to the nearest lower 
integral value. Thus, 42.5 percent will really be 42 percent.

You can scale by size to any dimensions in the range of 16 though 
32767 pixels.

Scaling is fairly time consuming.

You should probably avoid scaling dithered monochrome pictures 
down. Nothing terribly bad will happen, but for reasons which 
will become obvious if you think about it, the results will 
almost always be really ugly.

Note that the scaling percentage you enter determines the size of 
the destination image relative to the source image, not the 
actual percentage of scaling. Thus, entering 25 will produce a 
destination image which is one quarter... 25 percent... of the 
original image. Entering 200 will create a destination image 
twice as big... 200 percent of... the original. Entering 100 will 
produce a destination image identical to the source image.

By default, scaling will be the same in both dimensions. If you 
hit F8 while the scaling box is visible, you will be able to 
enter independent horizontal and vertical values. Hit F8 again 
and you will be able to enter the actual dimensions you want your 
destination image scaled to. 

Scaling is a batch function.


SPECIAL EFFECTS - F9
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This function has a submenu which will allow you to access a 
number of special tools for working with colour image files under 
Graphic Workshop. 

All of these are batch functions. The destination files will have 
"X_" in front of their names. Note that these functions require 
substantial amounts of memory.


Colour reduction
----------------------
This function allows you to create destination files with fewer 
colours than the source files they're derived from. You can use 
this function, for example, to reduce a 256-colour file down to a 
16-colour one. It's particularly useful for reducing 24-bit files 
down to 256-colour files.

Whenever you reduce the number of colours in a file, some image 
information will get lost. The simplest form of colour reduction 
is "remapping". This simply means that the destination image will 
have the best colour palette it can, and that all the pixels in 
it will be replaced with colours from that palette. The results 
aren't usually very attractive.

Colour dithering, also available in this function, can produce 
decidedly better results. With colour dithering, you can reduce 
24-bit files down to eight bits with very little loss of detail 
or colour resolution.

The palette used in colour reduction can be either quantized or 
fixed. A quantized palette is derived from the source image, 
while a fixed palette is predefined. In theory a quantized 
palette should be preferable, but in fact this is not always the 
case. A picture with a wide range of colour or small details 
which are markedly different from the rest of the image can fool 
the quantization algorithm into assigning too few colours to 
parts of your image you're interest in. In many cases you'll find 
that the "256 colour orthogonal" palette choice will produce the 
most attractive results.

Note that you can change the fixed palette to one of your own 
devising using the NEWCMAP function of the Graphic Workshop 
accessory disk, discussed elsewhere in this document.

The "Windows 16 colours" choice will use a palette identical to 
the one used by a sixteen-colour Windows screen driver. This is 
useful if you're creating files to be used as Windows wallpaper, 
or in other applications wherein they'll be displayed by Windows 
in sixteen colours.


Grey scale
----------------
This function creates a grey scale destination image from a 
colour source image. The number of bits of colour will remain the 
same.


Sharpen
-------------
This function will create a destination image with more contrast 
than its source image.


Soften
------------
This function will create a destination image with less contrast 
than its source image. This function is particularly useful for 
minimizing the effects of scanning moire patterns caused when you 
attempt to scan a previously screened original. In less technical 
terms, if you scan pictures of nude women from magazines, 
softening the image files will reduce the interference patterns.


Smudge
------------
This function will create a destination image which looks like 
it's being viewed through water drops.


Spatial posterization
---------------------------
This function will create a destination image in which the image 
is made up of large square areas. This effect is similar to the 
one used by television news to obscure the faces of people whose 
identities are to be kept secret.


Promote to 24 bits
------------------------
This function will create a 24-bit file with the same image 
information as a file with fewer colours. 


CATALOG - F10
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This function will create pictures of your pictures. Tag a 
number of images and hit F10. One or more files will be generated 
containing thumbnails of the selected images. These can be very 
helpful in keeping track of a lot of picture files.

Files created by the catalog function will be named CAT00000, 
CAT00001, CAT00002 and so on. The catalog function will not 
overwrite existing files... if the file CAT00000 exists, for 
example, it will begin with CAT00001.

When you create a catalog you can select one of a number of sizes 
for the final catalog files, in eight or twenty-four bit colour, 
with the individual thumbnails set in either portrait or 
landscape frames. Choosing twenty-four bit colour will create 
nicer catalog images, but they'll be sort of huge.

If you create eight-bit catalogs you can choose to either remap 
or dither the thumbnail images. As a rule, remapped images won't 
represent the colours of your source graphics all that well and 
dithered images will lose a bit of resolution. Of the two 
dithering options, Bayer dithering is faster and somewhat less 
attractive. Diffused dithering takes longer but arguably looks 
better.

Catalog files can be created with with a three-dimensional 
appearance or with a flat black background.

You can define all the catalog parameters through GWSINSTL
or through the session overrides.


SCRIPT LANGUAGE AND COMMAND LINE MODE
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
In addition to being run through its menus, Graphic Workshop can 
handle script files. A script file is a list of Graphic Workshop 
commands. Having been given a script file to work with, 
Graphic Workshop can perform a number of functions and then 
return to DOS or to the program which called it.

The Graphic Workshop script language facility is primarily for 
use in situations in which another application wishes to call 
Graphic Workshop, have it convert, print, view or otherwise 
manipulate some files in the background and then return control 
to the program which called it.

The Graphic Workshop script language and command line mode are 
discussed in detail in the documentation for the Graphic Workshop 
accessory disk, as found elsewhere in this document. 


CONFIGURATION
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Making permanent changes to the modifiable features of 
Graphic Workshop involves using the installer, GWSINSTL.EXE. 
The configuration of Graphic Workshop is handled by a separate program in 
order to keep GWS.EXE as small as possible, leaving lots of 
memory for putting graphics in.

The GWSINSTL program actually modifies GWS.EXE. In order for it 
to work, GWS.EXE and GWSINSTL.EXE must be in the same directory 
and must be so named. Both programs must be of the same version. 
Be aware that as it directly modifies GWS.EXE, there is the 
outside chance that a bug in the installer might crop up and kill 
GWS.EXE beyond repair. Make sure you have a virgin copy of 
GWS.EXE somewhere before you use the installer.

Place GWSINSTL.EXE and GWS.EXE in the same directory and type 
GWSINSTL. A menu will appear which will let you edit the runtime 
settings, add or change your screen driver and add or change your 
dot matrix printer driver.

Note that the screen drivers are contained in a file called 
GWSDRV.RES. The printer drivers are contained in a file called 
GWSPDR.RES. These files must be in the same directory as GWSINSTL 
for it to be able to find them. If one or both of them is 
missing, the corresponding options in the main screen of GWSINSTL 
will not be available.


EDIT RUNTIME - F1
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
If you select this option, you'll see a screen which will allow 
you to fine tune Graphic Workshop's performance to suit your 
requirements and hardware. You can use the up and down arrow keys 
and the Home and End keys to move through the items of this 
screen. Hitting Enter when the cursor is over an item which toggles 
will change its state. Hitting Enter when the cursor is over an 
editable field will allow you to type in a new data.

Note that you can run GWSINSTL and select this screen as often as 
you want to adjust the settings of its various parameters. 

When you're done changing things, hit F10 to get back to the main 
GWSINSTL menu.

Note that these items can be overridden by using command line 
switches when you run GWS.EXE, should you need them set 
differently from time to time.


Screen colours
--------------------
This item allows you to set the screen colours. By default, there 
are two sets of screen colours, to wit, a colour set which is 
predominantly blue and a monochrome set. If you don't like either 
of these, hit F1 when the cursor is on this item to create a 
custom set.


Memory type
-----------------
Hit Enter when the cursor is on this item to move through the 
available extra memory options. See the section dealing with 
memory elsewhere in this document for more information about 
selecting the correct memory type.


Display type
------------------
This item allows you to select the type of video card your system 
will be using. It defaults to AUTODETECT, which will cause 
Graphic Workshop to attempt to figure out what sort of card is in 
your system. You may have to change this if you have a multiple 
mode card which causes it to guess incorrectly. You will have to 
change it if you have a super VGA card wish to use it in its 
higher resolution modes.

If you have a super VGA card, set this field to SUPER VGA & 
OTHER and use the screen driver setup screen, discussed later in 
this section, to select a suitable driver.


Printer port
------------------
This item selects which parallel printer port to print images to. 
Note that you can only select LP1, LPT2 or LPT3. Note also that 
this selection only affects laser printers. See the section on 
printing elsewhere in this document for more information.


Memory overhead (Kbytes)
------------------------------
This is an editable item. It selects the number of kilobytes of 
memory overhead which Graphic Workshop will reserve. See the 
section on memory elsewhere in this document for more 
information.


Colour PostScript printing
--------------------------------
This item selects whether to assume that your PostScript printer 
can print in colour.


Default print dither
--------------------------
This item selects the type of dithering to use if you attempt to 
print a colour or grey scale picture to a LaserJet or dot matrix 
printer. This defaults to BAYER, which is fast but ugly. Select 
one of the other options if you'd like better results.


PostScript orientation
----------------------------
This item selects the default orientation for printing graphics 
to a PostScript printer.


Print filenames
---------------------

Print dates
-----------------

Print image size
----------------------

Print image colours
-------------------------

Print output resolution
-----------------------------
These items allow you to determine what, if anything, will be 
printed at the bottoms of pages which Graphic Workshop prints.


Display gamma
-------------------
The display gamma field can be used to adjust the gamma 
compensation for images displayed by Graphic Workshop. 


File name underbars
-------------------------
The file name underbars option determines whether new files 
created by the dither, crop, adjust, transform, scale and special 
effects functions of Graphic Workshop will use underbars, as
discussed elsewhere in this document. If you turn this feature 
off, the original base names of your images will be used. Be 
careful... doing so may cause Graphic Workshop to overwrite your 
source files.


Prompt for destination
----------------------------
If this option is enabled, a dialog will appear prompting your for 
a destination directory each time you perform an action under 
Graphic Workshop which will cause it to write files. If this 
option isn't enabled, your destination files will be written to 
the same directory as your source files reside in.


View resolution limit
---------------------------
This field will allow you to define the maximum resolution 
Graphic Workshop can switch your monitor into. This is useful if 
the Graphic Workshop display driver for your card can select 
modes which your card or monitor can't support. Set this field to 
UNLIMITED to disable this feature.


Drive map
---------------
The drive map field should contain the letter of every accessible 
drive on your system.


Application path
----------------------
This should be a complete path to the subdirectory and drive 
where GWS.EXE and GWS.RES live. For example:
  
        C:\GRAPHICS\
   
When this item is set correctly, you will be able to run 
Graphic Workshop from anywhere on your hard drive if its location 
is in your DOS path.

This field will initially default to the current directory when 
you run GWSINSTL for the first time. This will be correct in most 
situations.


Registration name
-----------------------
When you have registered Graphic Workshop, type your name into this field. 
This, in conjunction with the registration number provided when 
you registered the software will disable the closing beg notice. 
Note that you must enter your name exactly as it is written on 
the page with your registration number. Case, spaces and 
punctuation matter. 


Registration number
-------------------------
Enter your registration number in this field. 


EDIT FORMATS - F2
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This page will let you fine tune the way Graphic Workshop writes 
some types of files. 


MacPaint header
---------------------
This item allows you to determine whether MacPaint files 
generated by Graphic Workshop will have MacBinary headers in 
them. Leave this on if you don't know what these are. Note that 
this does not affect how Graphic Workshop reads MacPaint files... 
it will handle both types no matter you set this item.


IFF/LBM compression
-------------------------
This item determines whether IFF/LBM files will be compressed. 
Some old versions of Deluxe Paint choked on compressed files.


EPS preview
-----------------
This item determines whether EPS files will be created with TIFF 
previews.
         

TIFF compression
----------------------
This item determines the compression types to be used to create 
TIFF files. The options are:
        
- NONE          -- No compression.
- PBITS         -- PackBits run-length compression.
- GRP4          -- CCITT group four compression.
- LZW           -- LZW compression.

The three sections of this entry define the compression for two 
colour images, images having between four and 256 colours and 24-
bit images respectively.        


TIFF grey scale expansion
-------------------------------
This item determines whether TIFF grey scale files should be 
created with their grey scales expanded. This should be set ON if 
you'll be importing grey scale files into a desktop publishing 
package or otherwise using them to print with and to OFF if 
you'll be editing them.


TIFF colour/grey scale
----------------------------
This item determines whether TIFF files with more than one bit of 
colour will be created as colour or grey scale images. The grey 
scale expansion item will be ignored if this item is set to 
COLOUR.


EXE file compression
--------------------------
This item determines whether self-displaying EXE pictures will be 
compressed. See the section on EXE pictures elsewhere in this 
document for more information.


GIF file type
-------------------
This item allows you to determine whether Graphic Workshop should 
write old-style GIF87a files or the newer GIF89a files. 


Targa true colour bits
----------------------------
This item allows you to determine whether 24 bit images written 
to Targa files should be written with 24 or 16 bits of colour. 
See the discussion of Targa files elsewhere in this document for 
more information.


Dither brightness
-----------------------

Dither contrast
---------------------
In dithering an image, the original brightness levels of the 
source graphic will be expanded a bit to improve the quality of 
the dither. The amount by which the grey levels are expanded is 
set by the Dither brightness and Dither contrast items. You 
should experiment with these items if you aren't happy with the 
quality of the dithered images Graphic Workshop is producing. 
Note that you can use the original expansion map by setting both 
these values to 65535.


Printed halftone brightness
---------------------------------

Printed halftone contrast
-------------------------------
In order to print correctly to most black and white laser 
printers, colour and grey scale images must be "expanded", that 
is, their grey scales must be adjusted to compensate for the non-
linear grey scale of the output device. The amount of 
compensation varies among different laser printers. The 
compensation values for Graphic Workshop have been chosen to suit 
an average PostScript laser printer. However, you can fine
tune these if you like. These values should range from zero to 
about sixty-four, with twenty or thirty being about right for 
most output devices.

If you liked the older fixed contrast expansion curve from 
previous versions of Graphic Workshop, change both these fields 
to 65535.


JPEG quality
------------------
This item allows you to set the quality factor used when writing 
JPEG files. Set to 100, JPEG files will exhibit modest 
compression and no loss of detail. Reduced below 100 the 
compression will improve and the detail loss in your compressed 
images will become more noticeable.


JPEG read RGB
-------------------
If you have the JPEG read RGB switch turned off, JPEG files will 
be read as eight-bit images. If it's turned on, they'll be read 
as true-colour 24-bit images.


JPEG dither on read
-------------------------
If you have the JPEG read RGB switch turned off, enable this 
feature to produce attractive 256-colour dithered images from 
JPEG files. Turn it off to generate fairly ugly remapped images.


Catalog landscape width
-----------------------------

Catalog landscape depth
-----------------------------

Catalog portrait width
----------------------------

Catalog portrait depth
----------------------------
These items define the dimensions in pixels of the thumbnail 
frames in catalog images. They can range from 96 to 192 pixels.


Dither catalogs
---------------------
If this item is enabled, the thumbnail images in 256-colour 
catalogs will be dithered. This usually looks best. If it's off, 
they'll be remapped.


Three-dimensional catalogs
--------------------------------
If this item is enabled, catalogs will be created with a grey 
background and a three-dimensional appearance. If it's off 
they'll be created with a black background and red key lines 
around the thumbnails.


Relaxed UUE decoding
--------------------------
If this item is enabled, the internal UUE decoder in Graphic Workshop 
will attempt to decode all lines that look like they could be 
uuencoded. If it's not enabled, it will parse through blocks with 
begin and end fields, rejecting any data which isn't enclosed in 
such blocks. The former case will handle almost all uuencoded 
data, although pathological cases may turn up which will cause it 
to unpack files incorrectly. The latter case should always create 
properly decoded image files, but it will reject UUE files which 
don't have the correct block structure.


EDIT SCREEN DRIVER - F3
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This page will allow you to select a super-VGA screen driver. You 
must select a driver which is in keeping with the super VGA card 
you have in your system. If you attempt to display a large 
graphic in Graphic Workshop and the display misbehaves, chances 
are you have the wrong super-VGA screen driver installed.

Note that some drivers are intended for use with cards having a 
half megabyte or more of memory. If you have a 256 kilobytes VGA 
card, choose a suitable 256 kilobyte driver.

Note that not all the drivers support higher resolution modes. If 
you have a card which can display pictures in 1024 by 768 pixel 
resolution, you will also need a driver which can drive it in 
that mode. As a rule, all the super VGA drivers will handle 640 
by 480 pixels. Some can do better than this, but not all of them. 
We're working on improving the high end drivers.

IMPORTANT: If you don't know what kind of display card is in your 
system, and hence which driver to choose, run the VGACARD program 
which comes with Graphic Workshop. It will tell you what's in 
your system.

Note that the cropping and scanning functions require revision 
2.0 screen drivers or better. The F3 screen display will show you 
the revision numbers of drivers with revision two or better.

Finally, the drivers can set up a menu to allow you to select a 
screen mode if you hold down the Ctrl key when you go to view a 
file. This facility is only available if you have a driver of 
version 2.1 or better for your card. 

The following are some details about the drivers. Some of these 
drivers have been written by users of Graphic Workshop. If you'd 
like to write a driver, see the section on the Graphic Workshop 
accessory disk.


Amstrad 16 colour 640x200
-------------------------------
This driver was developed by Marcel Ward in Aberystwyth, Wales. 
It allows owners of Amstrad PCs having the custom sixteen-colour 
display cards supplied with these systems to look at colour 
images. We haven't tested this driver, lacking an Amstrad, but 
the source code looks right. 


VGA in pseudo 640x480
---------------------------
This is a very clever driver by Gregory Weeks which displays 640 
pixel wide 256-colour files on a 320 pixel wide screen by leaving 
out every alternate pixel. As the author notes, nothing is free 
and some detail is lost. However, if you have a VGA card with no 
640 pixel wide, 256-colour mode... or one which there is no 
driver for as yet... you'll find that this driver is often 
preferable to the stock 320 by 200 pixel MCGA mode.     


Ahead B
-------------
This is a driver for the Ahead B super VGA cards by David 
Mikelson of Solvang, California. This is a fairly basic driver... 
it does not support cropping, but it does handle the Ahead B 
super VGA modes. The author notes:

        This driver is for the SVGA card commonly referred to as 
        an "AHEAD B" card.  The card might also be referred to as 
        a "Standard Technologies VGA800C", an "Ahead Systems VGA 
        V-5000B", or a "Standard Technologies VGA CARD, REV B". 

        The card must have at least 512K memory on board.

        Note that an "AHEAD B" card is NOT the same as an "AHEAD 
        A". An Ahead A card uses different video modes, so this 
        driver won't work for an AHEAD A card.

Thanks to all these authors for their drivers.


VESA super VGA
--------------------

VESA 32k colours
----------------------

VESA 64k colours
----------------------

VESA 16m colours
----------------------
The VESA standard is supported by a number of super VGA cards in 
addition to their own proprietary standards. If your card 
supports VESA, either directly or through the use of a TSR, you 
can use one of these driver. This is especially handy if your 
card is not supported by a dedicated driver as yet. Note that 
these drivers will only attempt to select display modes which 
your card actually supports... if you call for a mode which does 
not exist on your card, the nearest available mode will be used.

Use VGACARD to determine the extent of VESA support available for 
your display card. You can use the 16m, 64k or 32k drivers if 
VGACARD says your VESA BIOS can handle display modes with 
16,777,216, 65,535 or 32,768 colours respectively. If the highest 
colour depth VGACARD reports is 256 colours, select the VESA 
super VGA driver.

These drivers may not work with some fairly flaky VESA 
implementations, such as the one on the early Orchid Fahrenheit 
1280 cards.


Orchid Fahrenheit 1280
----------------------------
This is a driver to support most Orchid Technologies Fahrenheit 
1280 cards... some of the really early ones with very funky VESA
implementations may not behave themselves. This driver assumes 
that your card has one megabyte of memory and a Sierra DAC for 
the high colour modes. We've only been able to test it on a 
limited number of Orchid cards, and we know that there have been 
a lot of revisions to this hardware. Let us know if you have 
difficulties with it. Also, note that Orchid Technologies was 
providing free BIOS upgrades as of this writing for the older 
cards... this cures a multitude of problems.

Users of other cards with VESA BIOSs should note that the Orchid 
driver is a VESA driver at heart, with some modifications to make 
it behave itself in this implementation. 


IBM XGA
-------------
This driver supports IBM XGA cards. It can display true-colour 
pictures at a resolution of 640 by 480 pixels, 256-colour 
pictures at resolutions up to 1024 by 768 pixels, sixteen-colour 
pictures at resolutions of up to 800 by 600 pixels and monochrome 
pictures at a resolution of 640 by 480 pixels.

We had to actually buy a PS/2 to write this driver, and if you 
use it for an extended period of time with an unregistered copy 
of Graphic Workshop we will most certainly send our leather 
winged demon of the night after you, as outlined else where in 
this document. 


Oak Tech 640 by 480
-------------------------

Oak Tech 800 by 600
-------------------------
These drivers support cards which use the Oak Technologies chip 
set. The higher resolution drivers also support the lower 
resolution modes, and will select the appropriate mode 
automatically. 


Tseng 4000 640 by 480
---------------------------

Tseng 4000 800 by 600
---------------------------

Tseng 4000 1024 by 768
----------------------------

Tseng 4000X 1024 by 768
-----------------------------
These drivers support cards which use the Tseng Labs chip set. 
The higher resolution drivers also support the lower resolution 
modes, and will select the appropriate mode automatically. The 
Tseng 4000X driver will support 1024 by 768 pixels at 256 
colours, and 640 by 480 or 800 by 600 pixels of 24-bit colour. 
You'll need a Tseng 4000 board with the Sierra DAC on it to use 
this driver. It will allow you to view 24-bit images directly.


Paradise D 640 by 480
---------------------------

Paradise D 800 by 600
---------------------------

Paradise D 1024 by 768
----------------------------
These are drivers for the newer Paradise cards which use the D 
series chips. You can tell if you have one by the markings on the 
large chip... you'll find the number 90C30 thereon. The 1024 by 
768 driver requires a megabyte on board. It supports the Paradise 
true colour mode, which means that if you have a RAMDAC on your 
card it will allow you to look at 24-bit images directly in 640 
by 480 and 800 by 600 pixel resolution. 


Trident 
--------------
Drivers are included to drive Trident 8900 series cards to 1024 
by 768 pixels in 256 colours and 800 by 600 in sixteen colours and 
monochrome. Choose the one which is appropriate for your 
hardware. The two lower resolution drivers have also been tested 
on the older 8800 series Trident chips.


Hercules TIGA 31.5k
-------------------------
This driver supports the Hercules Graphic Station card. Note that 
unlike a Graphic Station card, a VGA card only actually does 18-
bit colour. The 24-bit colour mode of the Graphic Station card 
has a resolution of 512 by 480 pixels. Its aspect ratio isn't all 
that good, but you can fiddle the monitor controls... for most 
monitors... to get pretty reasonable pictures. This driver should 
work on other cards supporting the Texas Instrument TIGA chip, 
but no promises. Note that this is a VGA level driver only... it 
does not do 24 bits directly.


Video Seven 1024i
-----------------------
This is a driver for the Headland Technologies Video Seven VRAM 
and Video Seven 1024i cards. It supports the 640 by 480 line 256-
colour mode. 


Paradise Plus Card
------------------------
This is a driver for the old Western Digital Paradise 
Plus card. 


Paradise Pro Card
-----------------------
This is a driver for the old Paradise Professional card (and 
clones thereof). It supports both the 640 by 400 and 640 by 480 
pixel, 256 colour modes.


Dell Super VGA 256K
-------------------------
This is a version of the Paradise Plus driver for older Dell 
systems. It has been modified so as not to use the 800 by 600 
pixel EGA and monochrome modes of the Paradise card, as this 
causes the super-VGA monitor on a Dell to click a (loud) internal 
relay every time it changes modes. If you don't mind the relay, 
or you want the 800 by 600 modes, use the Paradise Plus driver.


Dell Super VGA 512K
-------------------------
This is a 512K version of the Dell Super VGA driver for older 
Dell systems, that is, a Paradise driver with the 800 by 600 
pixel monochrome mode disabled.


ATI VGA Wonder
--------------------
Drivers are included to drive ATI VGA Wonder series cards to 1024 
by 768 pixels in 256 colours and 800 by 600 in sixteen colours and 
monochrome, as well as to various lesser resolutions. Choose the 
one which is appropriate for your hardware. There is also a 
driver for the ATI-XL card, which adds 24-bit colour support at 
640 by 480 pixels. This requires a full megabyte of memory on 
your card.
                

Standard VGA 320 x 400
----------------------------
This is a "gadget" driver for a stock VGA card which reprograms 
the beast into an undocumented 320 by 400 line mode. It should 
work on any VGA card, but being undocumented one cannot be sure. 
In any case, while interesting, this mode has such a squashed 
aspect ratio that it's not really useful for anything. In 
addition, having heavily interlaced memory, it's painfully slow 
to update.


Standard VGA 360 x 480
----------------------------
This is another undocumented mode. It gets still more on the 
screen, with still more distortion.


EDIT EXTERNAL PRINTER DRIVER - F4
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This page will allow you to select an external printer driver. 
You do not need an external printer driver if you will be 
printing to a PostScript printer or any sort of LaserJet or 
LaserJet compatible printer.

For the most part, external printer drivers are used to drive 
black and white dot matrix printers. Graphic Workshop does 
support external colour printers. At present, the only colour 
driver available is for the Hewlett-Packard PaintJet and Kodak 
Diconix inkjet printers.

If you don't find a driver for your printer in the available list 
of drivers, you can probably use the Epson FX-80 driver. Most dot 
matrix printers emulate this standard. If you'd like to write a 
driver, see the section on the Graphic Workshop accessory disk 
elsewhere in this document.

Note that the Epson LQ and LX drivers, the IBM ProPrinter drivers 
and the Panasonic and Roland drivers were all written by Chris 
Rogers of Ashtree Software. They're particularly slick, in that 
they will ask you what resolution you want to print at. We have 
not tested these, but they look to be well written.

The LaserJet III/4 driver is an alternate way to print halftones from 
colour and grey scale images to a LaserJet-compatible printer. 
You might find that you like it better than the internal LaserJet 
drivers. You should experiment with this one to see if it suits 
your needs.


COMMAND LINE SWITCHES
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
When you run Graphic Workshop by typing GWS at the command line, 
it will run using the default settings, as configured by 
GWSINSTL. There may be times when you'll want to override these 
settings temporarily, and rather than running the installer, you 
can use the command line switches. These only change the 
configuration of Graphic Workshop when they're used. The next 
time you run Graphic Workshop, it will return to its default 
configuration.

As a rule, command line switches should only be required in 
special circumstances. Note that you can override many of the 
Graphic Workshop options with the O command from the main screen.

You can always see a complete list of the command line switches 
by running Graphic Workshop as

     GWS ?

In using the command line switches, make sure that each one is 
separated on the command line by a space. Note that they are not 
case-sensitive. For example, this is a legal invocation of 
Graphic Workshop with some command line switches.

     GWS /SVG /vir /Psc

This has told Graphic Workshop to work with a super VGA card, 
virtual memory and a colour PostScript printer.

If you're using Graphic Workshop both under DOS and under 
Windows, you can add command line switches to the command line 
field of the Windows PIF file for Graphic Workshop to adjust its 
configuration if needs be.

The following are the command line switches which 
Graphic Workshop recognizes. Most of these options correspond to 
installation options in GWSINSTL.


MEMORY SWITCHES
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
/VIR - use virtual memory
/EMS - use expanded memory
/XMS - use extended memory
/XMV - use extended or virtual memory
/EMV - use expanded or virtual memory


VIDEO DRIVER SWITCHES
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
/CGA - use the CGA card driver
/EGA - use the EGA card driver
/VGA - use the VGA card driver
/HER - use the Hercules card driver 
/SVG - use the currently installed super VGA driver (if any)


PRINTER SWITCHES
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
/PFN - enable printing filenames
/PDT - enable printing dates
/PPS - enable printing image size
/PCL - enable printing number of colours
/PRS - enable printing resolution
/PRD - disable all the foregoing print options
/POR - print in portrait orientation on PostScript printers
/LAN - print in landscape orientation on PostScript printers
/PFN - print to a file, rather than to the printer
/PSM - assume a monochrome PostScript printer
/PSC - assume a colour PostScript printer
/PHn - set print dither (n=B:Bayer, F:Floyd-Steinberg, U:Burkes, S:Stucki)
/LPn - set printer port (n=1,2 or 3)
/Snn - set Postscript screen size (n=10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70 or 80)
/SDF - set PostScript halftone screen to the printer's default
/PRBn - set print brightness to n
/PRCn - set print contrast to n 


FILE FORMAT SWITCHES
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
/EPP - enable EPS preview creation
/EPN - disable EPS preview creation
/IFN - No compression on IFF files
/IFC - RL compression on IFF files
/MBH - MacPaint MacBinary header on
/MBN - MacPaint MacBinary header off
/TCL - Create colour TIFF files
/TCG - Create grey TIFF files
/TXP - Expand TIFF grey scale
/TXN - Do not expand TIFF grey scale
/EXC - Compress EXE pictures
/EXN - Do not compress EXE pictures
/G87 - Write GIF files as GIF 87a
/G89 - Write GIF files as GIF 89a
/T16 - Write true colour Targa files with 16 bits of colour
/T24 - Write true colour Targa files with 24 bits of colour
/JQLn - Set the JPEG write quality level to n
/TWMn - Set the TIFF write mode to n, where n is:
        - 0: NONE - NONE - NONE
        - 1: PBITS - PBITS - NONE
        - 2: LZW - LZW - NONE
        - 3: LZW - LZW - LZW
        - 4: GRP4 - LZW - LZW
See the section on configuration elsewhere in this document for 
more about the TIFF write options.


RUNTIME SWITCHES
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
/DRBn - set dither brightness to n
/DRCn - set dither contrast to n
/NCH - Disable the checks for limited memory and Windows


DESQVIEW, QEMM AND OTHER ENVIRONMENTS
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Graphic Workshop has not been written to run under DesqView, and 
in some cases may not do so reliably. It gets into trouble when 
it switches into a super-VGA graphics mode, which DesqView is 
unable to detect. Quarterdeck maintains that it does behave 
itself under recent releases of their package in other 
circumstances... we have not had the opportunity to test it as 
of this writing. 

Because of the way Graphic Workshop uses memory, we don't 
recommend running it under multi-tasking or task switching 
environments. Things like Double-DOS, GeoWorks and such may cause 
it to misbehave. 

If you want to run Graphic Workshop under Windows, we recommend 
that you get Graphic Workshop for Windows. 


VENTURA PUBLISHER TRICKS
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Graphic Workshop is great for getting images into Ventura 
Publisher documents. Here are a few tips for getting the most out 
of it.

Monochrome bitmapped images should be converted into IMG files 
for use with Ventura. Note that while Ventura will import colour 
PCX files with up to 16 colours, the results are rarely pretty. 
You'll do much better to halftone or dither colour PCX files for 
use with Ventura.

Having poured an image into a frame, use the Sizing and Scaling 
box in the Frames menu to select "By Scale Factors." Set the 
scale width to the natural size of the image... as it defaults 
to... or to some integral multiple of it. This will eliminate 
distortion or plaiding of the image.

You can create halftones from colour images by converting them to 
grey scale TIFF files. Ventura allows you a great deal of control 
over the way the grey scale and screening information is handled 
in a TIFF file.

You can also create halftones in Ventura by converting colour and 
grey scale files to IMG files and importing these. The only 
drawback to this over using grey scale TIFF files is that the 
grey scale and screening information will not be adjustable. Note 
that as of this writing the Windows and Macintosh implementations 
of Ventura did not seem to like IMG files with more than one bit 
of colour.

If you use the Define Colours option of the Frame menu to display 
colours as shades of grey rather than as colours... and if you're 
using an EGA or VGA monitor... grey scale TIFF files will appear 
in your chapters as pretty slick little photographs.

Note that if you will be creating grey scale TIFF files for use 
with Ventura, you should enable grey scale TIFF and grey scale 
expansion.


CORELDRAW TRICKS
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
If you import bitmapped images into Corel Draw, you can decide 
how they'll be handled once they get there by choosing the image 
type you use. Imported PCX files will be scaled to an arbitrary 
size upon entering Corel Draw, with the result that it's almost 
impossible to adjust them to get a one to one relationship 
between the image pixels and the printer pixels. This will make 
many PCX files print badly.

TIFF files, on the other hand, import initially with one to one 
scaling. If you use TIFF files and leave them at their initial 
size, or stretch them to integral multiples of their original 
sizes, they'll print without distortion or plaiding.

Grey scale TIFF files imported into Corel Draw come up as 
PostScript halftones... these can look very slick as part of a 
line drawing. Colour TIFF files are useful if you'll be 
outputting your Corel Draw files to a colour output device or if 
you'll be getting them separated.

You might want to check out "Mastering Corel Draw 3", published 
by Sybex Books, or "Corel Draw It 4", published by Addison 
Wesley, both by Steven William Rimmer, 


GRAPHIC WORKSHOP ACCESSORY DISK
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
The Graphic Workshop accessory disk provides you with tools to:

- Write a custom super-VGA screen driver for Graphic Workshop
- Write a custom scanner driver for Graphic Workshop.
- Write a custom external printer driver for Graphic Workshop
- Use the command line and script language of Graphic Workshop.
- Manipulate the resource files of Graphic Workshop.
- Fix problems with PCX files generated by some FAX boards.
- Change the way Graphic Workshop uses your mouse.
- Use the NEWCMAP function to change the default orthogonal 
  palette for colour dithering and remapping to one of your own 
  devising.

The disk includes the source code for a skeletal super-VGA 
driver, the source code for a printer driver, the source code for 
a scanner driver and a script resource, among other things. You 
will need MASM and LINK or TLINK to create drivers in addition to 
the tools provided with this disk. You'll also need a moderate 
level of ability in 8088-series assembly language programming to 
write drivers.

Complete instructions for using the script language interface are 
also included.

The Graphic Workshop accessories disk is included with all registered 
versions of Graphic Workshop


CONTACTING ALCHEMY MINDWORKS INC.
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
We hope you'll contact us to register Graphic Workshop... see the 
section about registering your software elsewhere in this 
document. 

You can contact us by mail by writing to us at:

Alchemy Mindworks Inc.
P.O. Box 500
Beeton, Ontario
L0G 1A0
Canada

Our CompuServe account is 70451,2734. Our Internet address is 
alchemy@accesspt.north.net -- we do not recommend that you leave 
credit card information on the Internet.

You can register Graphic Workshop with an American Express, Mastercard or 
Visa card by calling 1-800-263-1138 from the United States and 
Canada or 1-905-936-9500 from other places. Please note that this 
number is for ordering only... no one at it can answer technical 
questions. 

We will attempt to answer questions from unregistered users who 
write to us to the extent that their answers are needed for you 
to fully determine whether this software will suit your 
requirements. 

We can also be reached through the Alchemy Mindworks bulletin 
board. It's available twenty-four hours a day at 1-905-936-9501. 
As of this writing, the protocol was 300, 1200 or 2400 baud, or 
9600 baud v.32bis, eight data bits, no parity and one stop bit. 

The bulletin board always has the most recent versions of all our 
shareware on it, plus bug fixes, drivers and other relevant 
information. It only exists to support Alchemy Mindworks' 
shareware... it does not have a general file area.

If you encounter problems with a file, you're welcome to upload 
the errant file to our bulletin board. Actually, you can upload 
any picture files you like to the board... we enjoy getting 
pictures.

If you have a question about Graphic Workshop, feel free to leave it 
on the bulletin board. We try to answer all questions within 
twenty-four hours. Note that you must call back to retrieve your 
answer... please don't ask us to phone you or to leave the answer 
on another bulletin board.

Registered users of Graphic Workshop will receive our voice number 
for immediate technical support. The voice number is only 
available for use from 10:00am to 5:00pm EST. If you call and get 
our answering machine... it does happen... please call back 
later. 

We ask that in contacting us you appreciate that we are a small 
company with limited resources. If you have not registered this 
software we will not tell you to go to hell, but please don't ask 
us for half an hour of free technical support.


REGISTRATION
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
If you like Graphic Workshop and find it useful, you are requested to 
support it by sending us $40.00. This will entitle you to 
telephone support, notification of updates, a free copy of the 
latest version of this software and other worthwhile things. It 
will also avail you of a registration number to shut off the 
closing beg notice. More to the point, though, it'll make you 
feel good. We've not infested Graphic Workshop with excessive beg 
notices, crippled it or had it verbally insult you after ten 
days. We trust you to support this software if you like it.

If you want to see additional features in Graphic Workshop, register 
it. If we had an Arcturian mega-dollar for everyone who has said 
they'd most certainly register their copy if we'd add just one 
more thing to it, we could buy ourselves a universe and retire.

Oh yes, should you fail to support this program and continue to 
use it, a leather winged demon of the night will tear itself, 
shrieking blood and fury, from the endless caverns of the nether 
world, hurl itself into the darkness with a thirst for blood on 
its slavering fangs and search the very threads of time for the 
throbbing of your heartbeat. Just thought you'd want to know 
that.

Our address is:

Alchemy Mindworks Inc.
P.O. Box 500
Beeton, Ontario
L0G 1A0
Canada

You can register Graphic Workshop with an American Express, Mastercard or 
Visa card by calling 1-800-263-1138 from the United States and 
Canada or 1-905-936-9500 from other places. 

If you have previously registered Graphic Workshop, you can update 
your copy to the current release for $20.00.

If you have a FAX number, please include it in your registration. 
We're hoping to be able to handle notification of future updates 
of this software by FAX where we can. This is both considerably 
faster and a lot cheaper than mail.

You can FAX your order to us at 1-905-936-9502. You'll find an 
order form in this ZIP to make this easier. 

When you register Graphic Workshop, please specify the disk size you 
require. 

Please note that we are not able to accept purchase orders. We 
cannot ship software COD.


CANADIAN USERS
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
The registration fee for Graphic Workshop is $40.00 (CDN) plus 
seven percent GST, or $42.80. Please add $5.00 for 
shipping and handling. We sincerely regret collecting this tax on 
behalf of several levels of government which will only squander 
it. If you sincerely regret having to pay it, we urge you to 
express your regret and perhaps annihilate a few more political 
parties by voting in the next federal and provincial elections. 


AMERICAN USERS
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
The registration fee for Graphic Workshop is $40.00 (US). Please add 
$5.00 for shipping and handling. 

Please note that when you send us your order... and then when we 
send you your update back... two distinct post offices get to 
deal with the ensuing mail. It can take a few weeks for things to 
get through this system... we ask that you be patient. We don't 
fully understand why it takes less time for a package to get to 
Australia than it does to send one to Cleveland... some things 
are best left as mysteries.


OTHER USERS
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
The registration fee for Graphic Workshop is $40.00 (US). Please add 
$5.00 for shipping and handling. If you pay us by cheque, please 
make sure that it's a cheque drawn on an international bank, and 
that it will be negotiable in Canada. It must have the address of 
a North American clearing office printed on the cheque. If 
there's no bank clearance number along the bottom of the cheque, 
it will not clear. 

We cannot accept payment by Eurocheques... they are not 
negotiable outside Europe.

Payment from countries outside Canada must be in US dollars.


PAYING BY CREDIT CARD
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
We can accept payment by American Express, Mastercard and Visa 
only. We need your card number and expiry date and the name which 
appears on your card. 


TECHNICAL SUPPORT
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Technical support is available at 1-905-936-9501, 10:00am to 
5:00pm EST most business days. If you encounter our answering 
machine... it does happen occasionally... please try back later. 
One of the considerations in offering very low cost software is 
that we are unable to return calls for technical support.

If you are an unregistered user of Graphic Workshop, we will at our 
discretion assist you to the extent required for you to ascertain 
whether this software is suitable for your application. 

Callers who are rude, abusive or pig-headed with our technical 
support staff will wind up as demon-chow. See the section on 
Registration earlier in this document.

Please do not call our 800 number for technical support. The 
people who answer our sales line can put a credit card machine 
into warp drive, but they know less about software than most cats 
know about quantum mechanics.


BOOKS
ßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Steven William Rimmer's new novel The Order is available directly 
though Alchemy Mindworks. Please see the order form which 
accompanies this package.

If you use Alchemy Mindworks software, you might find the following 
books by Steven William Rimmer useful as well.

Constructing Windows Dialogs, published by Windcrest/McGraw Hill, 
will provide you with the techniques, secrets and dirty tricks to 
make the user interface of your Windows applications state of the 
art. Included are discussions of the standard Windows constrols, 
the BWCC and CTL3D custom control libraries, multimedia, using 
graphics and creating your own custom control libraries. 
Available in mid-1994.

Canned Code, published by Windcrest/McGraw Hill, is a collection 
of DOS and Windows programming tricks accumulated through years 
of real world application design. Included are bits of code to do 
high speed screen access, display a PCX file, access a dBASE DBF 
database, draw recursive graphics, play music, draw a maze, 
create fireworks, display a WordPerfect document, implement a 
text filter and many more useful and otherwise badly documentated 
functions.

Windows Multimedia Programming, published by Windcrest/McGraw 
Hill, includes complete C language source code for Windows 
applications to play wave and MIDI files, display and animate 
bitmaps, read Kodak Photo-CD images through the Kodak PCD 
libraries, play compact disc audio tracks from a CD-ROM drive and 
display Video for Windows AVI files. The source code for the 
applications in the book, along with about a hundred megabytes 
worth of example graphics, sounds, scores and movies, plus six 
compact disc audio tracks of celtic music, are included on a CD-
ROM.

If you're interested in writing programs which use graphics, 
you'll find everything you need to know in Bitmapped Graphics, 
second edition. It's published by Windcrest/McGraw Hill, (TAB 
book 4266). It features code to pack and unpack MacPaint, IMG, 
PCX, GIF and TIFF files, as well as chapters on screen drivers, 
dithering and printing.

An additional book on this subject, Supercharged Bitmapped 
Graphics, (TAB Book 4102), discusses the GIF 89a, WordPerfect, 
BMP, IFF/LBM, TGA, MSP, 24-bit PCX and colour TIFF file formats, 
as well as such subjects as colour dithering and colour printing.

Super VGA Graphics, published by Windcrest/McGraw Hill, includes 
source code to read and write GIF and PCX files, and to do 
extensive graphics in the sixteen, 256 and 32,768 colour screen 
modes of popular super VGA cards. There is a chapter about 
printing graphics to a variety of printers... ranging from simple 
dot matrix printers though laser printers to colour ink jet 
printers. The book also includes a chapter about writing animated 
super-VGA arcade games.

If you'd like to write applications which use menus, icons, 
windows and all the other paraphernalia of a graphical user 
interface, you might find the book PC Graphical User Interfaces 
handy. It's published by Windcrest/McGraw Hill (TAB Book 3875). 
It includes the C source for a complete graphical user interface 
library, related code to manage fonts and bitmaps and a tiny 
paint program. 

Windows Bitmapped Graphics, published by Windcrest/McGraw Hill, 
deals with the most popular image file formats in a Windows 
environment. It also discusses printing, viewing and dithering 
images in Windows applications.

A complete discussion of graphic file formats for use in word 
processing documents and desktop publishing chapters can be found 
in The Graphic File Toolkit, published by Addison-Wesley. This is 
an invaluable reference for anyone who wants to use graphic files 
but does not want to become a programmer in the process.

Corel Draw It, Published by Addison Wesley, is the essential 
guide to Corel Draw 4.0. Streamlined to take you from a standing 
start to complete mastery of Corel Draw in as short a time as 
possible, Corel Draw It offers a lucid explanation of lines and 
fills, colour, type and typography, bitmaps, importing and 
exporting, special effects and numerous other areas of Corel 
Draw.

If your local bookstore doesn't have these books, they can be 
mail or phone ordered from Christies of Cookstown, P.O. Box 392, 
Cookstown, Ontario L0L 1L0, Canada. Their phone number is 
1-705-458-1562. It has a FAX machine on it after hours. As of 
this writing, they're open seven days a week.


BUNDLING GRAPHIC WORKSHOP
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
If you'd like to include Graphic Workshop with your product, please 
get in touch with us. We have several ways to help you do this so 
your users get the most out of our software and we won't have to 
set our leather winged demon of the night on 'em.


SHAREWARE DISTRIBUTORS
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
We will, at our discretion, send out disks of our shareware 
applications to shareware distributors. Alternately, you can 
download the current versions of our applications from CompuServe 
in the PICS forum or from our bulletin board at 1-905-936-9501. 

We encourage you to use our bulletin board, as it will allow you 
to keep your copies of our applications up to date.

If you obtain current copies of our shareware, you have our 
permission to distribute them under the following terms. No 
written permission from us is required if you abide by these 
terms.

- That nothing be added to, deleted from or changed in the 
  archive files which contain our packages. This includes adding 
  ZIP file comments to them. The SETUP installer function must 
  remain as it's provided with this package.

- That our shareware is not included in or bundled with other 
  hardware or software without our written permission.

- That no printed documentation regarding our shareware is 
  included with the package without our written permission.

- That hard copy explaining that our packages are shareware is 
  included with the disks.

- That no more than $10.00 (US) be charged for the distribution 
  of whatever package our applications are part of. If you will 
  be charging more than this, please get in touch with us for 
  bundling rates.

You do have our permission to copy the ZIP files from our quad 
density disk to multiple lower density disks for distribution.

Please note that if you would like to distribute Graphic Workshop 
in "rack" packaging, that is, in a store rather than directly 
from a shareware distributor, we request that you contact us for 
permission to do so. We will require a proof copy of the 
packaging you intend to use prior to giving our consent for rack 
packaging.


OTHER ALCHEMY MINDWORKS SHAREWARE
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
The following are the other shareware packages we have available 
as of this writing. Our newsletter, available for the asking, 
will list all the current ones.


GRAPHIC WORKSHOP (RELEASE SEVEN)
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This is the last word in image programs. It converts, prints, 
views, dithers, thresholds, transforms, flips, rotates, scales, 
crops, colour adjusts, scans, quantizes, catalogs and wreaks 
special effects on MacPaint, GEM/Ventura IMG, PCX, GIF, JPG, 
TIFF, WPG, MSP, IFF/LBM, BMP, RLE, Halo CUT, Targa, PIC, HRZ, 
ART, EXE, RAS, TXT and EPS files. It drives CGA, Hercules, EGA, 
VGA and pretty well all super VGA cards. It will drive PostScript 
and LaserJet Plus laser printers, colour PostScript printers, 
colour inkjets and most dot matrix printers. It features batch 
processing, extended and expanded memory support, an intuitive 
user interface and easy to follow menus. It allows you to convert 
colour image files into superb black and white clip art for 
desktop publishing, among other things. The registered version 
comes with GWSCAP, our powerful VGA and super-VGA screen capture 
utility and a complete set of accessories.


GRAPHIC WORKSHOP FOR WINDOWS (RELEASE 1.1)
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Offering the same functionality as Graphic Workshop for DOS, the 
Windows implementation of this package offers a traditional 
Windows interface, multitasking and lots of things to click on. 
It converts, prints, views, dithers, thresholds, transforms, 
flips, rotates, scales, crops, colour adjusts, quantizes and 
wreaks special effects on MacPaint, GEM/Ventura IMG, PCX, GIF, 
TIFF, JPG, WPG, PIC, HRZ, MSP, IFF/LBM, BMP, RLE, Halo CUT, 
Targa, ART, RAS, rasterized WMF and CLP, Kodak Photo-CD, ICO, 
FLI, FLC, AVI, text and EXE picture files. Graphic Workshop for 
Windows will display and print on any card and printer 
respectively that can be driven by Windows. It features batch 
processing, an intuitive user interface and easy to follow menus. 
The 1.1 release adds a thumbnail preview mode, context sensitive 
help, easier installation and all sorts of new features. Includes 
several unicorns.


QUICKSHOW LIGHT FOR WINDOWS
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
A powerful, easy to use slide show package for Windows, QuickShow 
will allow you to create multimedia presentations which are as 
simple or as complex as you require them. It will work with 
images in the following formats: MacPaint, GEM/Ventura IMG, PCX, 
GIF, TIFF, JPG, WPG, PIC, HRZ, MSP, IFF/LBM, BMP, RLE, Halo CUT, 
Targa, ART, RAS and Kodak Photo-CD. Each image can include 
special effects as WAV, MIDI and AVI Video for Windows files. 
QuickShow Light is being offered as bookware... the cost of 
registration is to buy Steven William Rimmer's new novel The 
Order.


PAGAN DAYBOOK FOR WINDOWS
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This is a small Windows application which will help you keep 
track of the pagan calendar. Never again be at a loss to know 
when the summer solstice occurs, or when to celebrate the 
festival of Fortunalia. It's considerably more interesting than a 
calendar that tells you when the bank holidays and long weekends 
fall. The Pagan Daybook is being offered as bookware... the cost 
of registration is to buy Steven William Rimmer's new novel The 
Order.


PAGAN DAYBOOK FOR DOS
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This is a DOS text-mode implementation of the Pagan Daybook for 
Windows. The applications are more or less identical, save that 
this one has no graphics.


MULTIMEDIA WORKSHOP FOR WINDOWS -- LIGHT
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Multimedia Workshop for Windows Light is an easy to use Windows 
WAV, MIDI and AVI file manager. It allows you to audition, queue, 
rename, delete and investigate multimedia files. Multimedia 
Workshop for Windows Light is being distributed as bookware... 
the cost of registration is to buy Steven William Rimmer's new 
novel The Order. See VIEW-ME.GIF.


IMAGE GALLERY (RELEASE 1.1)
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Image Gallery is a visual database to help you keep track of a 
large number of image files quickly and effectively. It will 
create database files... galleries... of any combination of 
bitmapped image files, displaying them as small ``thumbnail'' 
images. It works with all the file formats supported by Graphic 
Workshop, with the exceptions of EPS, EXE and TXT. You can search 
a gallery visually or by key words. Each entry in a gallery 
supports key word and comment fields, as well as the dimensions, 
location and other specifics of each image. You can also print 
all or part of a gallery, producing hard copy catalogs of your 
images when you need them. Image Gallery will run with any VGA 
card. It uses a Microsoft compatible mouse and will drive any 
PostScript or LaserJet Plus compatible laser printer, and most 
dot matrix printers. Release 1.1 includes a full colour view 
function, colour thumbnails, exporting and multiple selection.


DESKTOP PAINT 256 (RELEASE TWO)
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
This is a complete rewrite of our popular super VGA paint 
package. Desktop Paint 256 is a powerful painting application. It 
will let you create and edit pictures stored in the MacPaint, 
GEM/Ventura IMG, PCX, GIF, TIFF, WPG, MSP, IFF/LBM, BMP, Halo 
CUT, and Targa formats. It features a rich selection of drawing 
and image manipulation tools, XMS and EMS support to work on 
large images and a user friendly interface. Looking very much 
like monochrome Desktop Paint in colour, it's a powerful 
application which will be equally useful for picture collectors, 
artists and desktop publishing users. It supports Paradise (and 
compatibles), Headland Video 7, Tseng Labs 4000 series cards, 
Trident cards which use 8900 series chips, Oak Technologies 
cards, ATI VGA Wonder cards and all cards with VESA capabilities. 
Note that you must have one of these super-VGA cards to use 
Desktop Paint 256... it does not run in the standard 320 by 200 
pixel "standard" VGA mode. Desktop Paint 256 requires a 
Microsoft-compatible mouse.


DESKTOP PAINT 16
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Desktop Paint 16 is a VGA paint package for use with images 
having up to sixteen colours. As with the monochrome 
implementation of Desktop Paint, it will read and write image 
files in the MacPaint, GEM/IMG, PCX files, GIF, TIFF, WPG, MSP, 
IFF/LBM, BMP and PIC formats. It has EMS and XMS support to 
handle images of virtually any size, an intuitive user interface 
and a wide selection of image creation and manipulation tools. 
Desktop Paint 16 can utilize fonts from many other sources, 
including Ventura Publisher, Macintosh FONT and NFNT resources 
and Windows FNT files. It requires a VGA card and a Microsoft-
compatible mouse.


DESKTOP PAINT (RELEASE THREE)
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Desktop Paint is a powerful monochrome paint package fine tuned 
for use with desktop publishing applications. It will read and 
write image files in all the formats Graphic Workshop supports 
with the exceptions of EPS and RLE. It has EMS and XMS support to 
handle images of virtually any size, an intuitive user interface 
and a wide selection of image creation and manipulation tools. 
Desktop Paint can utilize fonts from many other sources, 
including Ventura Publisher, Macintosh FONT and NFNT resources 
and Windows FNT files. Desktop Paint requires a Microsoft-
compatible mouse.


GRAFCAT (RELEASE 3.1)
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
GrafCat prints a visual catalog of your image files, with             
fifteen or sixteen pictures to a page, depending on the image 
orientation you choose. It supports all the file types that 
Graphic Workshop handles, and will drive any PostScript or 
LaserJet Plus compatible laser printer, including LaserJet II and 
LaserJet III series printers. This is a complete re-write of 
GrafCat... it now supports a file finder screen like the one in 
Graphic Workshop and numerous print options. It will also 
generate catalog images... arrays of full colour thumbnails... 
and has in internal image viewing function.

If you can't obtain them from the usual sources of shareware, 
they're available from us for $40.00 each preregisterd. They're 
also all available for downloading from our bulletin board at 
1-905-936-9501. 



REVISION HISTORY
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß

For them what cares...

Version 7.0e - Mostly a maintenance release. Modified the TIFF 
reader to handle CMYK TIFF files. Added a uudecoder to read 
graphics from Internet newsgroups directly... a singular 
convenience if you want to look at weather maps, erotica, fine 
art, erotica, animation cells, erotica or erotica. See the 
section on UUE files for more about how this feature works. Added 
a dedicated environment variable for Graphic Workshop's temporary 
files. Fixed a bug in the scaling function. Fixed a bug in the 
JPEG read function. Added a function to limit the display 
resolution.

Version 7.0d - Maintenance release... fixed a problem with the 
monochrome cropping function. Fine tuned the PCX writing resource 
somewhat. Fixed the Sun Raster resource to deal with grey scale 
RAS files correctly. Fixed a bug in the scaling function.

Version 7.0c - Maintenance release... fixed a problem with the 
true colour VESA driver when it confronts an ATI card with the 
ATI VESA TSR loaded. Fixed a problem with converting sixteen-
colour images to JPEG. Fixed a problem with displaying odd-size 
sixteen-colour EXE pictures. Fixed a problem which caused some 
GIF files to display as solid black. Fixed a problem with te TIFF 
reader to deal with files having no BitsPerSample tag.

Version 7.0b - Maintenance release... fixed a bug in the true 
colour VESA driver. Improved the catalog funtion and added error 
diffused dithering. Improved on a few minor memory management 
issues. Fixed a bug in the JPEG code that manged some grey scale 
JPEG files. Added start-up warnings for restricted memory and 
operation from within Windows. Fixed a bug that caused Windows to 
reboot after using Graphic Workshop in some cases. Added masking 
to clean up odd-length lines. Fixed a bug in the true colour 
dithering.

Version 7.0a - Major rewrite and restructuring... added JPEG and 
complete TIFF support, HRZ support, XGA and high-colour VESA 
support. We fixed a bug in the EXE pictures which affected how 
they displayed on some VESA adapters. We've deleted the scanner 
support and added cataloging, improved the memory management to 
manage what memory is left and added high colour PIC support. The 
package now includes a SETUP function for installation. Pretty 
well all the static data objects in Graphic Workshop have been 
shifted to GWS.RES to free up system memory. The new release 
includes countless minor enhancements.

Version 6.1w - Fixed a bug in the sixteen-colour PCX read 
function. Added Sun Raster support. Added 256-colour dithering 
for viewing 24-bit files. Fixed a bug that omitted the last 
format resource in the resource, usually ART. Added super-VGA 
detection for the EXE pictures. Added a StripByteCounts tag to 
the TIFF format, which keeps some TIFF readers happy.

Version 6.1v - Added VESA support to the EXE format. Added 
printer driver to do halftones on LaserJet-compatible printers. 
Added contrast expansion adjustments for halftone printing and 
dithering. Sped up the function that builds the file list in the 
main window and allowed it to find directories with extensions. 
Improved the image buffer allocation strategy. Added a DOS screen 
capture function.

Version 6.1u - Added drivers for the Diamond Speedstar 24X cards 
and improved the VESA support. The VESA drivers now handle high 
colour, and work with even the most unusual VESA 
implementations... we hope. Added zooming to the view mode. 
Improved the error trapping in most of the functions. Added 
support for the PFS ART format. Improved the Targa colour 
handling for Targa 16 files. Added orthogonal and Windows palette 
options to the colour reduction function. Added a thresholding 
option to the monochrome dithering function. Moves the help 
resources out of the main GWS.RES file to speed up the boot. 
Improved the EXE format video card detection... it should behave 
itself with PS/2s now. Added the VGACARD utility to help select a 
super VGA driver.

Version 6.1t - Added Deskjet 500C printer support, and 
considerably improved the handling of non-laser printers in 
general. Graphic Workshop can now handle external drivers with 
multiple modes. Fixed another inconsistency in the WPG format... 
this one caused some WPG files to be read with several lines 
missing from the bottom of the image. Fixed the PCX format to 
write sixteen-colour files that get along with more recent 
versions of PC Paintbrush. Added screen drivers for the Orchid 
Fahrenheit 1280 and Ahead B cards.

Version 6.1s - Fixed a problem with converting eight-bit files 
and modified the F9 colour reduction function to use sorted 
palettes. This sets up the reduced palette such that the darkest 
colours appear first in the palette, and hence the border will be 
dark when the file is displayed. Improved the PIC resource to 
write VGA-format PIC files. Added an option to write true-colour 
images to the Targa format with either 16 or 24 bits of colour. 
Added detailed on-line topical help.

Version 6.1r - Added mouse support. Fixed a problem with the WPG 
format that caused it to abort on WPG files created by the 
WordPerfect screen capture utility. Added fades and Oak 
Technologies to the EXE format. Fixed a bug in the script 
language that caused the scale function to choose the wrong 
destination file format. Fixed a bug in the extended memory 
support, and one in the BMP resource that caused problems in 
writing some 24-bit files.

Version 6.1q - Added drivers for Oak Technologies VGA cards. 
Largely rewrote the GIF format resource to make it a bit more 
bulletproof. Added a GIF 89a write option. Added contrast 
adjustment to the view mode. Simplified the view mode options 
menu a lot, deleted some of the obsolete options and replaced the 
error diffused dither with eight-colour Bayer dithering, which is 
much faster for a quick preview image.

Version 6.1p - Added Windows RLE support, allowing 
Graphic Workshop to create compressed Windows wallpaper and to            
change the initial Window logo. Added a scale to size option in 
the F8 scaling function. Added a time delay option for EXE 
pictures... make your own slide shows. Added new tags to the TIFF 
format to create TIFF files which will import correctly into 
CorelDRAW 3.0. Modified GWSINSTL to make the GWS.RES path in 
the F1 page default to the current directory.

Version 6.1o - Implemented registration numbers to disable the 
closing beg notice for registered users, fixed a bug in the EXE 
resource and added super-VGA support to it. Fixed several bugs in 
the LBM resource.

Version 6.1n - Improved the TIFF support for certain fairly 
obtuse types of colour TIFF files. Fixed an irregularity in the 
Stucki dithers.

Version 6.1m - Fixed an inconsistency in the way WPG files were 
being written. Added 24-bit IMG capability. Added a VESA screen 
driver. Fixed a bug which made sixteen-colour EXE files convert 
oddly now and again. Fixed a bug in the printing function of the 
script language. History lurches erratically forward... 

Version 6.1l - Fixed several bugs in the PIC and WPG format 
resources and one in GWSINSTL, which caused the EPS preview flag 
to be set incorrectly.

Version 6.1k - Improved the TIFF file format resource to handle 
still more TIFF file variations. TIFF files and Tory politicians 
were sent here to vex us... it's a shame you can't look forward 
to voting TIFF files into oblivion. Fixed a minor bug in the 24-
bit to monochrome dithering code.

Version 6.1j - Fixed a bug in the WPG format which caused some 
really huge WPG files not to read correctly.

Version 6.1i - Considerably sped up the colour remapping code for 
the F9 effects functions. This will shorten the time it takes to 
do colour remapping, dithering, softening, sharpening and spatial 
posterization. Added a Tseng 4000X driver to support Tseng cards 
with the Sierra DAC. This will allow users of these cards to view 
24-bit files directly. Fixed a bug in the TIFF format which 
prevented it from properly decoding some TIFF files, most notably 
those from Corel Draw. Improved the EXE format to display 
sixteen-colour grey scale files correctly on VGA cards.

Version 6.1h - Fixed a potential memory allocation bug in the 
file finder screen. Added new Paradise D series drivers, 
including one for the one megabyte Paradise card with a RAMDAC. 
If you have this card, the new drivers will let you view 24-bit 
files directly. Added a work-around for the EXE file format's 
problem detecting some types of display cards and improved the 
Hercules card detection. Added a tag all command to the main file 
finder. Added a mode selection menu to the RGB display mode.

Version 6.1g - Fixed a bug in the quantized dither view function. 
Added Promote to 24 bits to the F9 effects menu. Added an ATI-XL 
true colour driver. Fixed a bug in the remap to grey view 
function which only turned up after adding the ATI-XL driver. 
Fixed a bug in the Targa format which caused true colour images 
with palettes to be read incorrectly. Why would a true colour 
image require a palette, you ask... Added landscape printing for 
LaserJet printers and autosize modes for PostScript and LaserJet 
printing. Fixed a bug in the PCX format which caused some eight-
colour PCX files to view improperly. Improved the precompensation 
for printing multiple-bit images to PostScript printers... this 
should make them print out with more lifelike halftones. Improved 
the precompensation for expanded grey scale TIFF files as well... 
same curve. Added new drivers for ATI and Trident cards. Busy 
week, this one.

Version 6.1f - Fixed a bug in the rotate function which would 
cause monochrome files rotated by 90 or 270 degrees to get 
mangled or crash Graphic Workshop, depending on how big they 
were. Very nasty.

Version 6.1e - Added a menu so that screen drivers can prompt you 
for a display mode in viewing. Updated the Hercules driver to 
version 2.0 so it supports cropping. Fixed a bug the the rename 
function which caused it to lock up occasionally. Fixed a bug in 
the WordPerfect Graphics format which caused it to abort on some 
files. Fixed two bugs in the TIFF format... one which kept 
Macintosh TIFF files from reading properly and another which 
caused four bit grey scale TIFF files to be written incorrectly.

Version 6.1d - Fixed another bug in the Targa format which caused 
some 16-bit files to be read with the wrong colour intensity. 
Fixed a bug in the IFF/LBM format which caused some odd sized IFF 
files to be read incorrectly. Fixed a bug in the cropping 
function which caused it to behave erratically now and again. 
Added a wait box for the virtual memory allocation. Fixed a bug 
in several of the file format resources which caused F9 special 
effects to mangle sixteen-colour images and the scale and print 
functions to misbehave for some files.

Version 6.1c - Fixed a bug in the Targa format which caused the 
red and blue pixel values to be interchanged in some types of 24-
bit files. Disabled several features in the the view mode options 
menu which should have been disabled all along. Added large step 
panning in the view mode.

Version 6.1b - Fixed a bug in the Hercules card driver. Added
foreign language support.

Version 6.1a - Added cropping, scanning and interactive colour 
adjustment. The currently supported scanners include the HP 
ScanJet Plus and the HP ScanJet 2C. Almost all the screen drivers 
got updated. Added Halo CUT file support and we fixed a bug in 
several of the image file formats which would cause certain types 
of very large image files to compress poorly. We fixed the 
virtual memory manager, which previously declined to delete its 
scratch files if there was no TEMP variable in the environment. 
We upgraded the VGA screen drivers to display sixteen-colour 
images with no colour shift.



LEGAL DOGMA
ßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßßß
Neither the author nor Alchemy Mindworks Inc. assumes 
responsibility for any damage or loss caused by the use of these 
programs, however it comes down. If you can think of a way a 
program like this one can cause you damage or loss you've a 
sneakier mind than any of us.

All the registered trademarks used herein are registered to 
whoever it is that owns them. This notification is given in lieu 
of any specific list of trademarks and their owners, which would 
not be as inclusive and would probably take a lot longer to type. 

If you register Graphic Workshop, we will assume that you are doing 
so having tested the shareware version and ascertained that it's 
suitable for your hardware and requirements. We cannot provide 
refunds for shareware registration if you subsequently change 
your mind.

Graphic Workshop, Desktop Paint, Image Gallery, QuickShow, 
GrafCat, GWSCAP and Pagan Daybook, Multimedia Workshop for 
Windows and Storyteller are trademarks of Alchemy Mindworks Inc.
 
That's it...


UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

NAME
     unzip - list, test and extract compressed  files  in  a  ZIP
     archive

SYNOPSIS
     unzip [-Z] [-cflptuvz[abjnoqsCLV$]] file[.zip] [file(s) ...]
     [-x xfile(s) ...] [-d exdir]

DESCRIPTION
     unzip will list, test, or extract files from a ZIP  archive,
     commonly  found  on  MS-DOS  systems.   The default behavior
     (with no options) is to extract into the  current  directory
     (and  subdirectories  below it) all files from the specified
     ZIP archive.  A  companion  program,  zip(1L),  creates  ZIP
     archives; both programs are compatible with archives created
     by PKWARE's PKZIP and PKUNZIP for MS-DOS, but in many  cases
     the program options or default behaviors differ.

ARGUMENTS
     file[.zip]
          Path of the ZIP archive(s).  If the file  specification
          is  a  wildcard,  each matching file is processed in an
          order determined by the operating system (or file  sys-
          tem).   Only  the  filename can be a wildcard; the path
          itself cannot.  Wildcard  expressions  are  similar  to
          Unix egrep(1) (regular) expressions and may contain:

          *    matches a sequence of 0 or more characters

          ?    matches exactly 1 character

          [...]
               matches any  single  character  found  inside  the
               brackets;  ranges  are  specified  by  a beginning
               character, a hyphen, and an ending character.   If
               an  exclamation point or a caret (`!' or `^') fol-
               lows the left bracket, then the range  of  charac-
               ters within the brackets is complemented (that is,
               anything except the characters inside the brackets
               is considered a match).

          (Be sure to quote any character which  might  otherwise
          be  interpreted  or  modified  by the operating system,
          particularly under Unix and VMS.)  If  no  matches  are
          found,  the  specification  is  assumed to be a literal
          filename; and if that also fails, the  suffix  .zip  is
          appended.  Note that self-extracting ZIP files are sup-
          ported, as with any other ZIP archive; just specify the
          .exe suffix (if any) explicitly.

     [file(s)]
          An optional list of archive members  to  be  processed,

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                 1

UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

          separated  by  spaces.   (VMS  versions  compiled  with
          VMSCLI defined must delimit files with commas  instead.
          See  -v  in  OPTIONS below.) Regular expressions (wild-
          cards) may be  used  to  match  multiple  members;  see
          above.   Again, be sure to quote expressions that would
          otherwise be expanded or modified by the operating sys-
          tem.

     [-x xfile(s)]
          An optional list of archive members to be excluded from
          processing.   Since wildcard characters match directory
          separators (`/'), this option may be  used  to  exclude
          any  files  which  are in subdirectories.  For example,
          ``unzip foo *.[ch] -x */*'' would extract all C  source
          files  in the main directory, but none in any subdirec-
          tories.  Without the -x option, all C source  files  in
          all directories within the zipfile would be extracted.

     [-d exdir]
          An optional directory to which to  extract  files.   By
          default,  all files and subdirectories are recreated in
          the current directory; the -d option allows  extraction
          in an arbitrary directory (always assuming one has per-
          mission to write to the directory).  This  option  need
          not  appear  at the end of the command line; it is also
          accepted immediately after the  zipfile  specification,
          or  between  the file(s) and the -x option.  The option
          and directory may be  concatenated  without  any  white
          space between them, but note that this may cause normal
          shell  behavior  to  be  suppressed.   In   particular,
          ``-d ~''  (tilde) is expanded by Unix C shells into the
          name of the  user's  home  directory,  but  ``-d~''  is
          treated  as a literal subdirectory ``~'' of the current
          directory.

OPTIONS
     Note that, in order to support obsolescent hardware, unzip's
     usage  screen is limited to 22 or 23 lines and should there-
     fore be considered a reminder  of  the  basic  unzip  syntax
     rather than an exhaustive list of all possible flags.

     -Z   zipinfo(1L) mode.  If the first option on  the  command
          line  is  -Z,  the  remaining  options  are taken to be
          zipinfo(1L) options.  See the appropriate  manual  page
          for a description of these options.

     -c   extract files to stdout/screen (``CRT'').  This  option
          is  similar  to  the  -p option except that the name of
          each file is printed as it is extracted, the -a  option
          is  allowed,  and  ASCII-EBCDIC conversion is automati-
          cally performed if appropriate.   This  option  is  not
          listed in the unzip usage screen.

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                 2

UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

     -f   freshen existing files, i.e., extract only those  files
          which  already  exist  on disk and which are newer than
          the disk  copies.   By  default  unzip  queries  before
          overwriting,  but the -o option may be used to suppress
          the queries.  Note that under many  operating  systems,
          the  TZ  (timezone)  environment  variable  must be set
          correctly in order for  -f  and  -u  to  work  properly
          (under Unix the variable is usually set automatically).
          The reasons for this are somewhat subtle but have to do
          with  the  differences  between  DOS-format  file times
          (always local time) and Unix-format  times  (always  in
          GMT)  and  the necessity to compare the two.  A typical
          TZ value is ``PST8PDT'' (US Pacific time with automatic
          adjustment   for  Daylight  Savings  Time  or  ``summer
          time'').

     -l   list  archive  files  (short   format).    The   names,
          uncompressed  file  sizes  and  modification  dates and
          times of the specified files are  printed,  along  with
          totals  for all files specified.  In addition, the zip-
          file comment and individual file comments (if any)  are
          displayed.   If  a file was archived from a single-case
          file system (for example, the old MS-DOS FAT file  sys-
          tem)  and the -L option was given, the filename is con-
          verted to lowercase and is prefixed with a caret (^).

     -p   extract files to pipe (stdout).  Nothing but  the  file
          data  is  sent  to  stdout,  and  the  files are always
          extracted in binary format, just as they are stored (no
          conversions).

     -t   test archive files.  This option extracts  each  speci-
          fied file in memory and compares the CRC (cyclic redun-
          dancy check, an enhanced checksum) of the expanded file
          with the original file's stored CRC value.

     -u   update existing files and create new  ones  if  needed.
          This  option  performs  the  same  function  as  the -f
          option, extracting (with query) files which  are  newer
          than  those with the same name on disk, and in addition
          it extracts those files which do not already  exist  on
          disk.   See  -f  above  for  information on setting the
          timezone properly.

     -v   be verbose or  print  diagnostic  version  info.   This
          option  has  evolved  and now behaves as both an option
          and a modifier.  As an  option  it  has  two  purposes:
          when  a  zipfile is specified with no other options, -v
          lists archive files verbosely, adding to  the  -l  info
          the  compression  method,  compressed size, compression
          ratio and 32-bit CRC.  When  no  zipfile  is  specified
          (that is, the complete command is simply ``unzip -v''),

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                 3

UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

          a diagnostic screen is printed.   In  addition  to  the
          normal  header  with  release  date  and version, unzip
          lists the home Info-ZIP ftp site and where  to  find  a
          list of other ftp and non-ftp sites; the target operat-
          ing system for which it was compiled, as well as  (pos-
          sibly)  the hardware on which it was compiled, the com-
          piler and version used, and the compilation  date;  any
          special  compilation  options  which  might  affect the
          program's operation (see also  DECRYPTION  below);  and
          any options stored in environment variables which might
          do the same (see  ENVIRONMENT  OPTIONS  below).   As  a
          modifier  it  works  in  conjunction with other options
          (e.g., -t) to produce more verbose or debugging output;
          this is not yet fully implemented but will be in future
          releases.

     -z   display only the archive comment.

MODIFIERS
     -a   convert text files.  Ordinarily all files are extracted
          exactly  as they are stored (as ``binary'' files).  The
          -a option causes files identified by zip as text  files
          (those  with  the `t' label in zipinfo listings, rather
          than `b') to be automatically extracted as  such,  con-
          verting  line  endings,  end-of-file characters and the
          character set itself as necessary.  (For example,  Unix
          files  use  line  feeds (LFs) for end-of-line (EOL) and
          have no end-of-file (EOF) marker; Macintoshes use  car-
          riage  returns  (CRs)  for  EOLs; and most PC operating
          systems use CR+LF for EOLs and control-Z for  EOF.   In
          addition, IBM mainframes and the Michigan Terminal Sys-
          tem use EBCDIC rather than the more common ASCII  char-
          acter  set,  and  NT supports Unicode.) Note that zip's
          identification of text files is by  no  means  perfect;
          some  ``text''  files  may  actually be binary and vice
          versa.    unzip   therefore   prints   ``[text]''    or
          ``[binary]''  as  a  visual  check  for  each  file  it
          extracts when using the  -a  option.   The  -aa  option
          forces all files to be extracted as text, regardless of
          the supposed file type.

     -b   treat all files as binary (no text conversions).   This
          is a shortcut for ---a.

     -C   match filenames case-insensitively.  unzip's philosophy
          is ``you get what you ask for'' (this is also responsi-
          ble for the -L/-U  change;  see  the  relevant  options
          below).   Because  some  filesystems  are  fully  case-
          sensitive (notably those under the Unix operating  sys-
          tem) and because both ZIP archives and unzip itself are
          portable across platforms, unzip's default behavior  is
          to  match  both  wildcard  and  literal filenames case-

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                 4

UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

          sensitively.  That is, specifying ``makefile''  on  the
          command  line  will  only  match  ``makefile''  in  the
          archive, not ``Makefile'' or  ``MAKEFILE''  (and  simi-
          larly  for  wildcard  specifications).  Since this does
          not  correspond  to  the   behavior   of   many   other
          operating/file  systems  (for  example, OS/2 HPFS which
          preserves mixed case but is not sensitive to  it),  the
          -C  option may be used to force all filename matches to
          be case-insensitive.  In the example above,  all  three
          files  would  then match ``makefile'' (or ``make*'', or
          similar).  The -C option affects files in both the nor-
          mal file list and the excluded-file list (xlist).

     -j   junk paths.  The archive's directory structure  is  not
          recreated;  all  files  are deposited in the extraction
          directory (by default, the current one).

     -L   convert to lowercase any  filename  originating  on  an
          uppercase-only  operating  system or filesystem.  (This
          was unzip's default behavior in releases prior to 5.11;
          the  new  default  behavior  is  identical  to  the old
          behavior with the -U option, which is now obsolete  and
          will be removed in a future release.)  Depending on the
          archiver, files archived under single-case  filesystems
          (VMS,  old  MS-DOS  FAT,  etc.)  may  be stored as all-
          uppercase names; this can be ugly or inconvenient  when
          extracting to a case-preserving filesystem such as OS/2
          HPFS or a case-sensitive one such as  under  Unix.   By
          default unzip lists and extracts such filenames exactly
          as they're stored (excepting truncation, conversion  of
          unsupported  characters,  etc.); this option causes the
          names of all files from certain systems to be converted
          to lowercase.

     -n   never overwrite existing  files.   If  a  file  already
          exists,  skip  the  extraction  of  that  file  without
          prompting.  By default unzip queries before  extracting
          any  file  which already exists; the user may choose to
          overwrite only the current file, overwrite  all  files,
          skip extraction of the current file, skip extraction of
          all existing files, or rename the current file.

     -o   overwrite existing files without prompting.  This is  a
          dangerous  option,  so  use it with care.  (It is often
          used with -f, however.)

     -q   perform operations quietly (-qq = even quieter).  Ordi-
          narily  unzip  prints  the  names  of  the  files  it's
          extracting or testing, the extraction methods, any file
          or zipfile comments which may be stored in the archive,
          and possibly a summary when finished with each archive.
          The  -q[q] options suppress the printing of some or all

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                 5

UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

          of these messages.

     -s   [OS/2, NT,  MS-DOS]  convert  spaces  in  filenames  to
          underscores.   Since  all  PC  operating  systems allow
          spaces  in  filenames,  unzip   by   default   extracts
          filenames  with  spaces intact (e.g., ``EA DATA. SF'').
          This can be awkward, however, since MS-DOS in  particu-
          lar  does  not  gracefully support spaces in filenames.
          Conversion of spaces to underscores can  eliminate  the
          awkwardness in some cases.

     -U   (obsolete; to be removed in  a  future  release)  leave
          filenames  uppercase if created under MS-DOS, VMS, etc.
          See -L above.

     -V   retain (VMS) file version numbers.  VMS  files  can  be
          stored   with   a   version   number,   in  the  format
          file.ext;##.  By default the  ``;##''  version  numbers
          are  stripped,  but  this  option  allows  them  to  be
          retained.  (On filesystems  which  limit  filenames  to
          particularly  short lengths, the version numbers may be
          truncated or stripped regardless of this option.)

     -X   [VMS] restore owner/protection info (may require system
          privileges).    Ordinary  file  attributes  are  always
          restored, but this option allows UICs to be restored as
          well.   [The  next  version  of unzip will support Unix
          UID/GID info as well, and possibly NT permissions.]

     -$   [MS-DOS, OS/2, NT, Amiga] restore the volume  label  if
          the  extraction medium is removable (e.g., a diskette).
          Doubling the option  (-$$)  allows  fixed  media  (hard
          disks)  to  be  labelled  as  well.  By default, volume
          labels are ignored.

ENVIRONMENT OPTIONS
     unzip's default behavior may be modified via options  placed
     in  an  environment  variable.   This  can  be done with any
     option, but it is probably most useful with the -a, -L,  -C,
     -q, -o, or -n modifiers:  make unzip auto-convert text files
     by default, make it convert filenames from uppercase systems
     to  lowercase,  make it match names case-insensitively, make
     it quieter, or make it always overwrite or  never  overwrite
     files  as  it extracts them.  For example, to make unzip act
     as quietly as possible, only reporting errors, one would use
     one of the following commands:

         UNZIP=-qq; export UNZIP    Unix Bourne shell
         setenv UNZIP -qq           Unix C shell
         set UNZIP=-qq              OS/2 or MS-DOS
         define UNZIP_OPTS "-qq"    VMS (quotes for lowercase)

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                 6

UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

     Environment options are, in effect, considered  to  be  just
     like  any  other  command-line options, except that they are
     effectively the first options on the command line.  To over-
     ride  an  environment option, one may use the ``minus opera-
     tor'' to remove it.  For instance, to override  one  of  the
     quiet-flags in the example above, use the command

         unzip --q[other options] zipfile

     The first hyphen is the normal  switch  character,  and  the
     second  is  a  minus sign, acting on the q option.  Thus the
     effect here is to cancel one quantum of quietness.  To  can-
     cel both quiet flags, two (or more) minuses may be used:

         unzip -t--q zipfile
         unzip ---qt zipfile

     (the two are equivalent).  This may seem awkward or  confus-
     ing,  but it is reasonably intuitive:  just ignore the first
     hyphen and go from there.  It is also  consistent  with  the
     behavior of Unix nice(1).

     As suggested by the examples  above,  the  default  variable
     names  are  UNZIP_OPTS  for  VMS  (where  the symbol used to
     install unzip as a foreign command would otherwise  be  con-
     fused  with  the  environment  variable),  and UNZIP for all
     other operating systems.  For  compatibility  with  zip(1L),
     UNZIPOPT  is  also  accepted (don't ask).  If both UNZIP and
     UNZIPOPT  are  defined,  however,  UNZIP  takes  precedence.
     unzip's  diagnostic  option (-v with no zipfile name) can be
     used to check the values of  all  four  possible  unzip  and
     zipinfo environment variables.

     The timezone variable (TZ) should be set  according  to  the
     local  timezone  in  order  for  the  -f  and  -u to operate
     correctly.  See the description of  -f  above  for  details.
     This  variable may also be necessary in order for timestamps
     on extracted files to be set correctly.

DECRYPTION
     Encrypted archives are fully supported by Info-ZIP software,
     but due to United States export restrictions, the encryption
     and decryption sources are not  packaged  with  the  regular
     unzip  and  zip distributions.  Since the crypt sources were
     written by Europeans, however, they are freely available  at
     sites  throughout  the  world; see the file ``Where'' in any
     Info-ZIP source or binary distribution  for  locations  both
     inside and outside the US.

     Because of the separate distribution, not all compiled  ver-
     sions  of  unzip support decryption.  To check a version for
     crypt  support,  either  attempt  to  test  or  extract   an

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                 7

UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

     encrypted  archive,  or else check unzip's diagnostic screen
     (see the -v option above) for ``[decryption]'' as one of the
     special compilation options.

     There are no runtime options for decryption;  if  a  zipfile
     member  is  encrypted,  unzip  will  prompt for the password
     without echoing what is typed.  unzip continues to  use  the
     same  password  as  long  as it appears to be valid; it does
     this by testing a 12-byte header.  The correct password will
     always check out against the header, but there is a 1-in-256
     chance that an incorrect password will as well.  (This is  a
     security  feature  of  the  PKWARE  zipfile format; it helps
     prevent brute-force attacks which  might  otherwise  gain  a
     large  speed  advantage by testing only the header.)  In the
     case that an incorrect password is given but it  passes  the
     header  test  anyway,  either  an incorrect CRC will be gen-
     erated for the extracted data or else unzip will fail during
     the  extraction  because the ``decrypted'' bytes do not con-
     stitute a valid compressed data stream.

     If the first password fails the header check on  some  file,
     unzip  will prompt for another password, and so on until all
     files are extracted.  If a password is not known, entering a
     null  password (that is, just a carriage return) is taken as
     a signal to skip all further  prompting.   Only  unencrypted
     files  in  the  archive(s)  will  thereafter  be  extracted.
     (Actually that's not quite true; older versions  of  zip(1L)
     and  zipcloak(1L)  allowed  null  passwords, so unzip checks
     each encrypted file to see if the null password works.  This
     may  result in ``false positives'' and extraction errors, as
     noted above.)

     Note that there is presently no  way  to  avoid  interactive
     decryption.   This  is  another security feature:  plaintext
     passwords given on the command line or stored in files  con-
     stitute  a  risk because they may be seen by others.  Future
     releases may (under protest, with great disapproval) support
     such shenanigans.

EXAMPLES
     To  use  unzip  to  extract  all  members  of  the   archive
     letters.zip  into  the  current directory and subdirectories
     below it, creating any subdirectories as necessary:

         unzip letters

     To extract all  members  of  letters.zip  into  the  current
     directory only:

         unzip -j letters

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                 8

UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

     To test letters.zip, printing only a summary  message  indi-
     cating whether the archive is OK or not:

         unzip -tq letters

     To test all zipfiles in the current directory, printing only
     the summaries:

         unzip -tq \*.zip

     (The backslash before the asterisk is only required  if  the
     shell  expands  wildcards,  as  in Unix; double quotes could
     have  been  used  instead,  as  in   the   source   examples
     below.)  To  extract  to  standard  output  all  members  of
     letters.zip whose names end in .tex, auto-converting to  the
     local  end-of-line  convention  and  piping  the output into
     more(1):

         unzip -ca letters \*.tex | more

     To extract the binary file paper1.dvi to standard output and
     pipe it to a printing program:

         unzip -p articles paper1.dvi | dvips

     To extract all FORTRAN and C source  files--*.f,  *.c,  *.h,
     and Makefile--into the /tmp directory:

         unzip source.zip "*.[fch]" Makefile -d /tmp

     (the double quotes are necessary only in Unix  and  only  if
     globbing is turned on).  To extract all FORTRAN and C source
     files, regardless of case (e.g., both *.c and *.C,  and  any
     makefile, Makefile, MAKEFILE or similar):

         unzip -C source.zip "*.[fch]" makefile -d /tmp

     To extract any such files but convert any  uppercase  MS-DOS
     or  VMS  names  to lowercase and convert the line-endings of
     all of the files to the local standard (without  respect  to
     any files which might be marked ``binary''):

         unzip -aaCL source.zip "*.[fch]" makefile -d /tmp

     To extract only newer versions of the files already  in  the
     current  directory,  without  querying (NOTE:  be careful of
     unzipping in one timezone a zipfile created in  another--ZIP
     archives  to  date  contain  no  timezone information, and a
     ``newer'' file from an eastern timezone  may,  in  fact,  be
     older):

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                 9

UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

         unzip -fo sources

     To extract newer  versions  of  the  files  already  in  the
     current  directory and to create any files not already there
     (same caveat as previous example):

         unzip -uo sources

     To display a  diagnostic  screen  showing  which  unzip  and
     zipinfo options are stored in environment variables, whether
     decryption support was compiled in, the compiler with  which
     unzip was compiled, etc.:

         unzip -v

     In the last five examples, assume that UNZIP  or  UNZIP_OPTS
     is set to -q.  To do a singly quiet listing:

         unzip -l file.zip

     To do a doubly quiet listing:

         unzip -ql file.zip

     (Note that the ``.zip'' is generally not necessary.)  To  do
     a standard listing:

         unzip --ql file.zip
     or
         unzip -l-q file.zip
     or
         unzip -l--q file.zip       (extra minuses don't hurt)

TIPS
     The current maintainer, being a lazy  sort,  finds  it  very
     useful  to  define  a pair of aliases:  tt for ``unzip -tq''
     and ii for ``unzip -Z'' (or ``zipinfo'').  One may then sim-
     ply  type ``tt zipfile'' to test an archive, something which
     is worth making a habit of  doing.   With  luck  unzip  will
     report  ``No  errors  detected in zipfile.zip,'' after which
     one may breathe a sigh of relief.

     The maintainer  also  finds  it  useful  to  set  the  UNZIP
     environment variable to ``-aL'' and is tempted to add ``-C''
     as well.  His ZIPINFO variable is set to ``-z''.

DIAGNOSTICS
     The exit status (or error level) approximates the exit codes
     defined  by PKWARE and takes on the following values, except
     under VMS:

          0    normal; no errors or warnings detected.

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                10

UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

          1    one or more warning errors were  encountered,  but
               processing  completed  successfully  anyway.  This
               includes zipfiles where  one  or  more  files  was
               skipped  due  to unsupported compression method or
               encryption with an unknown password.

          2    a  generic  error  in  the  zipfile   format   was
               detected.   Processing may have completed success-
               fully anyway;  some  broken  zipfiles  created  by
               other archivers have simple work-arounds.

          3    a severe error in the zipfile format was detected.
               Processing probably failed immediately.

          4-8  unzip was unable to allocate  memory  for  one  or
               more buffers.

          9    the specified zipfiles were not found.

          10   invalid options  were  specified  on  the  command
               line.

          11   no matching files were found.

          50   the disk is (or was) full during extraction.

          51   the end of the ZIP archive was encountered  prema-
               turely.

     VMS interprets standard Unix (or PC) return values as other,
     scarier-looking things, so by default unzip always returns 0
     (which reportedly gets converted into a VMS  status  of  1--
     i.e., success).  There are two compilation options available
     to  modify  or  expand   upon   this   behavior:    defining
     RETURN_CODES results in a human-readable explanation of what
     the real error status was (but still  with  a  faked  ``suc-
     cess''  exit  value),  while defining RETURN_SEVERITY causes
     unzip to exit  with  a  ``real''  VMS  status.   The  latter
     behavior  will  become the default in future versions unless
     it is found to conflict with officially defined  VMS  codes.
     The  current mapping is as follows:   1 (success) for normal
     exit, 0x7fff0001  for  warning  errors,  and  (0x7fff000?  +
     16*normal_unzip_exit_status) for all other errors, where the
     `?' is 2 (error) for unzip values 2 and 9-11, and  4  (fatal
     error)  for  the  remaining  ones  (3-8, 50, 51).  Check the
     ``unzip -v''  output  to  see  whether  RETURN_SEVERITY  was
     defined at compilation time.

BUGS
     When attempting to extract a corrupted archive, unzip may go
     into  an  infinite  loop and, if not stopped quickly enough,
     fill all available disk  space.   Compiling  with  CHECK_EOF

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                11

UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

     should fix this problem for all zipfiles, but the option was
     introduced too late in the testing process to  be  made  the
     default  behavior.  Future versions will be robust enough to
     fail gracefully on damaged archives.  Check the ``unzip -v''
     output  to see whether CHECK_EOF was defined during compila-
     tion.

     [MS-DOS] When extracting or testing files from an archive on
     a  defective  floppy  diskette,  if  the  ``Fail'' option is
     chosen from DOS's ``Abort, Retry, Fail?'' message, unzip may
     hang   the  system,  requiring  a  reboot.   Instead,  press
     control-C (or control-Break) to terminate unzip.

     Under DEC Ultrix, unzip will sometimes fail on long zipfiles
     (bad  CRC, not always reproducible).  This is apparently due
     either to a hardware bug (cache memory) or an operating sys-
     tem bug (improper handling of page faults?).

     Dates and times of stored directories are not restored.

     [OS/2] Extended  attributes  for  existing  directories  are
     never  updated.   This is a limitation of the operating sys-
     tem; unzip has no way to determine whether the stored attri-
     butes are newer or older than the existing ones.

     [VMS] When extracting to another directory, only the  [.foo]
     syntax  is  accepted  for the -d option; the simple Unix foo
     syntax is silently  ignored  (as  is  the  less  common  VMS
     foo.dir syntax).

     [VMS] When the file being extracted already exists,  unzip's
     query  only  allows skipping, overwriting or renaming; there
     should additionally be a choice for creating a  new  version
     of  the file.  In fact, the ``overwrite'' choice does create
     a new  version;  the  old  version  is  not  overwritten  or
     deleted.

SEE ALSO
     funzip(1L), zip(1L), zipcloak(1L), zipgrep(1L), zipinfo(1L),
     zipnote(1L), zipsplit(1L)

AUTHORS
     The primary Info-ZIP authors  (current  zip-bugs  workgroup)
     are:   Jean-loup Gailly (Zip); Greg R. Roelofs (UnZip); Mark
     Adler (decompression, fUnZip); Kai Uwe Rommel  (OS/2);  Igor
     Mandrichenko  and  Hunter  Goatley (VMS); John Bush and Paul
     Kienitz (Amiga); Antoine Verheijen (Macintosh);  Chris  Her-
     borth  (Atari); Henry Gessau (NT); Karl Davis, Sergio Monesi
     and Evan Shattock (Acorn Archimedes); and Robert Heath (Win-
     dows).   The  author  of  the original unzip code upon which
     Info-ZIP's is based was Samuel H. Smith;  Carl  Mascott  did
     the  first  Unix port; and David P. Kirschbaum organized and

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                12

UNZIP(1L)         MISC. REFERENCE MANUAL PAGES          UNZIP(1L)

     led Info-ZIP in its early days.  The full list of  contribu-
     tors  to  UnZip  has  grown quite large; please refer to the
     CONTRIBS file in the UnZip source distribution for  a  rela-
     tively complete version.

VERSIONS
     v1.2   15 Mar 89   Samuel H. Smith
     v2.0    9 Sep 89   Samuel H. Smith
     v2.x   fall 1989   many Usenet contributors
     v3.0    1 May 90   Info-ZIP (DPK, consolidator)
     v3.1   15 Aug 90   Info-ZIP (DPK, consolidator)
     v4.0    1 Dec 90   Info-ZIP (GRR, maintainer)
     v4.1   12 May 91   Info-ZIP
     v4.2   20 Mar 92   Info-ZIP (zip-bugs subgroup, GRR)
     v5.0   21 Aug 92   Info-ZIP (zip-bugs subgroup, GRR)
     v5.01  15 Jan 93   Info-ZIP (zip-bugs subgroup, GRR)
     v5.1    7 Feb 94   Info-ZIP (zip-bugs subgroup, GRR)
     v5.11   2 Aug 94   Info-ZIP (zip-bugs subgroup, GRR)
     v5.12  28 Aug 94   Info-ZIP (zip-bugs subgroup, GRR)

Info-ZIP         Last change: 28 Aug 94 (v5.12)                13

